Title: An Additional Resonance Damping Control for Grey-Box D-PMSG Wind Farm Integrated Weak Grid

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.05579v1

Published Time: Wed, 08 Apr 2026 00:52:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
> 1

# An Additional Resonance Damping Control for Grey-Box D-PMSG Wind Farm Integrated Weak Grid 

Tao Zhang, Student Member, IEEE, Songhao Yang, Member, IEEE, Zhiguo Hao, Senior Member, IEEE, Hongyue Ma, Student Member, IEEE, Baohui Zhang, Fellow, IEEE 

AbstractŌĆöConsiderable efforts have been made to address the resonance issue of the Direct-drive Permanent Magnet Synchronous Generator (D-PMSG) wind farm integrated power systems. However, the D-PMSG controller structure and pa-rameters are concealed because of commercial secrecy, thus the target system exhibits grey-box characteristics. The existing resonance damping methods are either unavailable for grey-box systems or economically infeasible, which makes resonance damping of grey-box systems extremely challenging. To ad-dress this issue, this paper proposes an Additional Resonance Damping Control (ARDC) specifically for the grey-box D-PMSG system. This strategy is achieved by incorporating an additional control loop outside the D-PMSG controller. Firstly, the external impedance characteristics are obtained by the frequency sweeping technique offline and then the key parameter of the additional control loop is determined by the Bode-diagram-based method under the worst stability scenario. Once the resonance occurs, the external impedance of the black-box D-PMSG is reshaped online to increase the magnitude stability margin of the system, thus providing ef-fective resonance damping. The ARDCŌĆÖs effectiveness is finally verified in the simulation and controller-hardware-in-the-loop experiment under various operating conditions. Index TermsŌĆögrey-box system, D-PMSG, black-box con-troller, resonance stability, resonance damping, additional damping control. 

I. Introduction 

# IN recent years, there has been a growing concern regarding the frequent resonance accidents attributed to the D-PMSG wind farm (WF) integrated weak grid [1ŌĆō4]. Significant efforts have been devoted to develop-ing suitable control strategies for mitigating resonance. However, the detailed structure and parameters of D-PMSG controllers are not disclosed by manufacturers due to commercial and technical confidentiality [5, 6], thereby leaving operators with a grey-box scenario. This complicates the resolution of resonance issues stemming from the integration of the D-PMSG wind farm with the weak grid. On the issue of resonance damping for the white-box systems, the mitigation methods can be divided into two 

This work was supported by National Key Research and Develop-ment Program of China (2022YFB2402700), Technology Project of State Grid Corporation of China (52272222001J). Tao Zhang, Songhao Yang, Zhiguo Hao, Hongyue Ma, Baohui Zhang are with State Key Laboratory of Electrical Insulation and Power Equipment, XiŌĆÖan Jiaotong University, XiŌĆÖan, China (e-mail: zhghao@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, songhaoyang@xjtu.edu.cn). 

categories, namely 1) utilizing external equipment [7ŌĆō 11] and 2) improving the wind turbines(WTs)ŌĆÖ control strategies [12ŌĆō17]. The external equipment of the former methods in-clude existing equipment [7ŌĆō9] and additional specialized equipment[10, 11]. In ref. [7], the subsynchronous reso-nance damping of fixed-speed WTs with series FACTS de-vices is studied. A designed damping controller is added to the power control loop of the gate-controlled series capac-itor (GCSC) to suppress the resonance. Ref. [8] proposes a wideband harmonic voltage feedforward control strategy of static synchronous compensator (STATCOM) to miti-gate resonance of the D-PMSG WF. However, the counter-measures based on such FACTS devices are economically infeasible and can only be adopted if such expensive equip-ment is already installed. Moreover, ref. [10] points out that resonance damping is effective only when the capacity of FACTS equipment is more than 50% of the installed WTsŌĆÖ capacity. The other utilizing-external-equipment methods adopt a special-purpose shunt-converter concept [10, 11], which is supplemented by an adaptive control to provide multiple-frequency reference currents for injection to achieve active resonance damping. In addition, the methods can online capture the resonant frequency with the aid of a frequency estimator. The special-purpose devices could be a competitive alternative despite the ad-ditional investment and the complexity of implementation. In contrast, the resonance damping methods based on improving WTsŌĆÖ control have received more attention because of their better economy [18]. For resonance prob-lems in different frequency bands, ref. [12] proposes an impedance reshaping control strategy based on a combina-tion of active damping and virtual admittance to improve the stability margin of D-PMSG WTs connected to the weak grid. However, the influence of the machine-side converter (MSC) is ignored in the strategy development process, which may affect the damping effects. Ref. [16] finds that PLL parameters are critical to the resonance issue, and thus designs a PLL-based resonance damp-ing controller to suppress resonance. Nevertheless, this method requires an accurate estimation of the resonance frequency. More importantly, the above improving-WTs-control-based methods are not available in grey-box D-PMSG wind farms that contain black-box WTs. For the resonance issue of the grey-box system, 

> arXiv:2604.05579v1 [eess.SY] 7 Apr 2026 2

the stability analysis method based on the impedance-/admittance- method can be perfectly applied [19, 20], while the resonance damping studies are still inadequate. Among the damping methods described above, directly improving the WTsŌĆÖ control does not apply to the grey-box systems, since the modification authority of the black-box controller is not available. The external-equipment-based approaches may be suitable for grey-box systems, but they are economically infeasible and subject to planning constraints. Some attempts have been made to damp the resonance of grey-box systems. In ref. [6], the controller parameters of the wind energy conversion system are estimated. Then one can identify which part of the controller has a significant impact on the system stability and reshape the deviceŌĆÖs impedance accordingly. Such an idea is consistent with the work of ref. [21]. However, the above two methods make some assumptions about the control structure of the black-box wind turbine, which requires prior knowledge of the WTsŌĆÖ controller. To address the resonance issue of D-PMSG WF in-tegrated weak grid, this paper proposes an Additional Resonance Damping Control (ARDC) for grey-box D-PMSG. The contributions can be summarized as follows: 1) A resonance damping method is proposed for the grey-box D-PMSG system. This is achieved by adding a control loop outside the D-PMSG controller. It enables the impedance reshaping of the grey-box system with-out the need for expensive external equipment and does not rely on the detailed D-PMSG controller model. The method strikes a favorable balance between economy and applicability. 2) The proposed ARDC can be easily tuned and entirely applicable to the black-box D-PMSG. Only one key parameter needs to be tuned in advance. Once the resonance occurs, the external impedance can be re-shaped online by employing the resonance component extraction technique. 3) The proposed method is robust and doesnŌĆÖt negatively impact the target system. The parameter tuning is based on the worst stability condition, thus this method can effectively damp the resonance under various conditions. Besides, the proposed activation criterion prevents ARDCŌĆÖs false start-up in fault condi-tions. The simulation and controller-hardware-in-the-loop (CHIL) tests eventually verify the efficiency and adaptability of the method. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II presents resonance analysis of the grey-box D-PMSG WF integrated weak grid. Section III presents the proposed ARDC. The method is verified through the simulation and the CHIL experiments in Section IV and Section V, respectively. Section VI conducts control verification under faults and the method comparison. Section VII concludes this paper. 3&& 

> *5,'
> LF
> RI
> CI
> Z*5,'

# #

> C
> 306*
> '306*ZLQGIDUP
> 306*
> 306*
> '306*
> (a) The D-PMSG grid-tied systemŌĆÖs structure.

<'306* s

=*5,' s

 

iDEF vDEF  

> (b) Equivalent block diagram of the D-PMSG grid-connected system. Fig. 1. The target system and its equivalent block diagram.

II. Resonance Analysis of the Grey-box D-PMSG Integrated Weak Grid A typical D-PMSG grid-tied systemŌĆÖs structure is shown in Fig. 1(a), and the relevant parameters are given in TABLE I. This system will be used as the target system for resonance analysis in Sections II, III, and IV.                                           

> TABLE I The relevant parameters of the D-PMSG grid-tied system Parameter Symbol Value D-PMSG Rated Voltage U10.69kV D-PMSG Rated Power S1.632MVA DC Rated Voltage Udc 1.2kV Rated Frequency f150Hz DC capacitor C0.15F PLL Proportional Gain Kpp 0.085 PLL Integral Gain Kpi 32 GSC Proportional Gain Kp0.25 GSC Integral Gain Ki355 GSC Decoupling Gain Krd 0.0471 MSC Proportional Gain Kmp 0.8 MSC Integral Gain Kmi 50 MSC Decoupling Gain Kmrd 0.2561 DC outer-loop Proportional Gain Kdcp 0.5 DC outer-loop Integral Gain Kdci 5Connection Inductance Lc0.00015H Filter Resistance Rf0.02 ╬®
> Filter Capacitance Cf5.0e-4 F Equivalent resistance of the line RLine 0.012 ╬®
> Equivalent reactance of the line XLine 0.25 ╬®3

A. Model Building The target system can be split into two subsystems originating from the Point of Common Coupling (PCC), specifically the D-PMSG wind farm (WF) and the AC power grid. By consolidating the entire WF into a single D-PMSG [9, 11], the impedance properties of a single D-PMSG can mirror those of the entire WF. Subsequently, the stability of the D-PMSG WF integrated weak grid can be assessed. The grid can be represented as a series com-bination of a voltage source and an impedance, while the D-PMSG WF can be represented as a parallel connection of a current source and an admittance [16]. Consequently, the target system is simplified as illustrated in Fig. 1(b), where YDŌłÆPMSG (s) and ZGRID (s) denote the equivalent admittance of the D-PMSG WF and the impedance of the AC grid, respectively. Leveraging impedance-based methodologies, the stability of the target system can be appraised using the generalized Nyquist criterion or Bode-diagram-based criterion. Considering the frequency coupling effects of the D-PMSG [22], the MIMO model of the D-PMSG and the AC grid can be denoted as 

YDŌłÆPMSG (s) = 

[ Y11 DŌłÆPMSG (s) Y12 DŌłÆPMSG (s)Y21 DŌłÆPMSG (s) Y22 DŌłÆPMSG (s)

]

(1) and 

ZGRID (s) = 

[ Z1GRID (s) 00 Z2GRID (s)

]

, (2) respectively. The non-diagonal elements of YDŌłÆPMSG (s)

indicate the frequency coupling effect. In Eqs. (1) and (2), 

s is the Laplace operator. When the transfer function is discrete, s = jŽē , and Žē represents the angular frequency. For the D-PMSGŌĆÖs admittance TF matrix YDŌłÆPMSG (s),the specific parameters can be found in works [23, 24] and will not be reiterated here. Additionally, it is worth noting that: 1) The study focuses on the D-PMSG containing a black-box controller, whose structure and parameters are unknown because of commercial and technical confi-dentiality [5, 6], thus the parameters of YDŌłÆPMSG (s)

are unknown and not mandatory; 2) The parameters of YDŌłÆPMSG (s) are considered un-available when performing resonance analysis and control design. a) For the simulation, a pseudo-black-box controller is employed because the parameters are mandatory for simulation modeling. However, the resonance analysis and control do not depend on these specific parameters. b) For the CHIL experiment, a real black-box controller is employed. which is an engineerable controller and one does not have access to its exact structure and parameters. For the gridŌĆÖs impedance TF matrix ZGRID (s),

Z1GRID (s) = Rgrid + sL grid 

Z2GRID (s) = Rgrid + s2Lgrid 

where s2 = s ŌłÆ 2jŽē 1, and Žē1 is the fundamental angular frequency; Rgrid and Lgrid represent the equivalent resis-tance and inductance of the grid, respectively. To analyze the stability more intuitively, the MIMO model YDŌłÆPMSG (s) can be transformed into the equiva-lent SISO models Y1DŌłÆPMSG (s) and Y2DŌłÆPMSG (s) account-ing for the coupling terms according to ref. [25], and the detailed transforming method can be written as 

Y1DŌłÆPMSG (s) = Y 11 DŌłÆPMSG (s) ŌłÆ Y21 DŌłÆPMSG (s)Y 12 DŌłÆPMSG (s)Y22 DŌłÆPMSG (s) + Y 2GRID (s) ,

(3) where Y2GRID (s) = [Z 2GRID (s)] ŌłÆ1, and 

Y2DŌłÆPMSG (s) = Y 22 DŌłÆPMSG (s) ŌłÆ Y12 DŌłÆPMSG (s)Y 21 DŌłÆPMSG (s)Y11 DŌłÆPMSG (s) + Y 1GRID (s) ,

(4) where Y1GRID (s) = [Z 1GRID (s)] ŌłÆ1. After the model trans-formation, the resonance stability of the system can be directly analyzed by the Bode-diagram-based method. It is worth noting that if the target D-PMSG is a black box, its MIMO model can be obtained by frequency sweeping (FS) [19], and then transformed into two SISO models by Eqs. (3) and (4). B. Stability Analysis of the Grey-Box System With the decrease in grid strength, the stability of the D-PMSG grid-tied system weakens. The grid impedance in Fig. 1 is set to 1.0Zgrid , 1.2Zgrid , and 1.4Zgrid respectively, where Zgrid = 0 .012 + j0.25╬® .Fig. 2 displays the Bode diagrams of the target D-PMSG system, including two sub-graphs, based on the equivalent SISO models. If and only if the two sub-Bode diagrams meet the stability conditions, the target system is stable. One can see that with the increase of the grid impedance, the magnitude of Y1GRID (s) and Y2GRID (s)

decrease obviously. When the grid impedance is 1.4Zgrid ,the magnitude of Y1DŌłÆPMSG (s) is greater than Y1GRID (s)

at 77Hz, where the phase difference between the two is 180┬░, as shown in Fig. 2(a). Meanwhile, the magnitude of Y2DŌłÆPMSG (s) is greater than Y2GRID (s) at 23Hz, where the phase difference between the two is 180┬░, as shown in Fig. 2(b). This suggests that the system is unstable when the grid impedance changes to 1.4Zgrid , and the potential resonance frequencies are 23/77Hz. When the grid impedance is 1.0Zgrid and 1.2Zgrid , the magnitude of YDŌłÆPMSG (s) is smaller than that of YGRID (s) at the frequency with a phase difference of 180┬░, indicating the system is stable. Under the weak grid condition, the magnitude mar-gin of the target system decreases, which damages the systemŌĆÖs stability. It is necessary to reshape the D-PMSGŌĆÖs impedance to increase the magnitude margin of the system under weak grid conditions, so as to damp the resonance. For this issue, most of the impedance reshaping methods are based on the white-box model [12ŌĆō17], and the corresponding controller is allowed to be modified. However, the existence of commercial barriers makes the 4+] ┬ā 

> (a)

+] ┬ā  

> (b) Fig. 2. Bode diagrams of the equivalent SISO subsystems.

D-PMSG controller only be regarded as a black box in the actual situation [5, 6]. To break through this limitation, a novel additional resonance damping control (ARDC) for the grey-box D-PMSG system is designed. It is worth noting that the ARDC is customized for typical PMSG configurations, specifically those connected to the power grid through back-to-back converters, referred to as D-PMSG. The modeling, control design, and validation of control effectiveness in the grey-box system all take into account the complete D-PMSG architecture. III. The Proposed ARDC Method A. ARDC Design A novel ARDC is designed for the grey-box D-PMSG outside the controller. Fig. 3 shows the detailed ARDC abc ─«╚Ģ 1) abc ─«╚Ģ 

&RPSHQVDWLRQORRS v─«╚Ģ 

iDEFU 

i─«╚Ģ U 

─«╚Ģ /abc 

v─«╚Ģ ,U

$5'& 

i─«,U

i╚Ģ,U

RY

╚”ULY

RY

╚”rLY

v─«v╚Ģ



5)( 

v─«,U

v╚Ģ,r ╚”r iDEFU 

&RPSHQVDWLRQORRS 

LF RI

CI

C

> 306*

<306* s

%ODFNER[&RQWUROOHU iDEF vDEF 

vabc, U $5'& 

> $5'& $GGLWLRQDO5HVRQDQFH'DPSLQJ&RQWURO

 2XWSXWRIDGGLWLRQDOFRQWUROEORFNV 

 ,QSXWRIDGGLWLRQDOFRQWUROEORFNV  

> 1) 1RWFK)LOWHU 5)( 5HVRQDQW)UHTXHQF\(VWLPDWRU

*ULGWLHGFRQWURO3RZHUFRQWURO 

8QNQRZDEOH VWUXFWXUHSDUDPHWHUV 

vabc, U iDEF vDEF  

> Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of the additional control strategy for damping resonance of the grey-box D-PMSG grid-tied system.

structure, which is mainly composed of a notch filter (NF) and a compensation loop. In Fig. 3, the inputs to the original controller of the D-PMSG are the voltage and current signals from the grid-tied point, while the outputs are the control signals for the back-to-back converters. For the controller, one can only know that its basic functions are 1) locking the grid angle for grid connection and 2) controlling the WTŌĆÖs power, but its detailed structure and parameters are unknown and inaccessible due to commercial and technical confidentiality [5, 6, 19], rendering the involved controllers as black-box controllers. Situated outside the controller, the ARDC is capable of achieving impedance reshaping by processing the voltage signals input to the original converter controller. The notch filter (NF) in the ARDC serves to eliminate the influence of the proposed control on the fundamental component, whereas the resonant frequency estimator (RFE) is utilized for the online parameter tuning of the resonant frequency point. Specifically, the RFE outputs the resonant angular frequency Žēr [16]. Further details regarding the remaining control loops in the ARDC are 5<'306* s iDEF vDEF 

=*5,' s   

> +)% s+1) s

 

 

> Fig. 4. Equivalent block diagram of the D-PMSG grid-connected system with ARDC.

<'306* s iDEF vDEF 

=*5,' s +1) s +)% s

            

> (a) Form 1 <'306* s+1) s+)% s
> < '306* s+1) s+)% s

iDEF vDEF 

=*5,' s

  

> (b) Form 2 Fig. 5. Two forms of simplification of the equivalent block diagram.

provided subsequently. The transfer function of NF is 

HNF (s) = G0(s2 + Žē20 )

s2 + 2 ╬ŠŽē 0s + Žē20

, (5) where G0 and ╬Š are the gain and damping coefficients. The effect of the compensation loop on the signal can be expressed as 

vabc, r = vabc + iabc HFB , (6) where vabc and iabc are the initial voltage and current signals, respectively; vabc, r represents the processed voltage signal; and 

HFB = ŌłÆ(Rv + jŽē r Lv), (7) where Rv and Lv are the introduced virtual resistor and inductor, respectively. To realize Eq. (7) outside the controller, the voltage vabc 

and current iabc ,r are converted from the abc coordinate to the ╬▒╬▓ coordinate through the Clark transformation. The transfer function of HFB in the ╬▒╬▓ coordinate can be written as 

H╬▒╬▓  

> FB

=

[ ŌłÆRv Žēr Lv

ŌłÆŽēr Lv ŌłÆRv

]

. (8) B. ARDCŌĆÖs function According to the ARDCŌĆÖs topology, the entire target systemŌĆÖs transfer function can be equivalent to the form shown in Fig. 4. The compensation loop HNF (s)H FB (s)

is superimposed between the input and output of the original system. According to MasonŌĆÖs formula, the block diagram in Fig. 4 can be further simplified to obtain the two forms in Fig. 5. Form 1 indicates that adopting ARDC  

> Fig. 6. Bode diagram of the designed NF.

is equivalent to adding a supplemental term to the grid impedance. And Form 2 illustrates that utilizing ARDC essentially reshapes the D-PMSG impedance. From the perspective of Form 1, the grid impedance is reshaped as 

Zre GRID (jŽē r ) = Z GRID (jŽē r ) ŌłÆ (Rv + jŽē r Lv)H NF (s) (9) for the resonance components (RCs). This indicates that the proposed ARDC reduces the gridŌĆÖs impedance, thereby improving the stability of the target system. To avoid changing the phase characteristics of the original grid, the power factor angle of the compensation impedance is set to be consistent with that of the grid impedance, i.e., 

Rv = kR grid and Lv = kL grid , where k is the control coefficient. From the perspective of Form 2, the reshaped D-PMSGŌĆÖs admittance can be represented as 

Yre DŌłÆPMSG (s) = YDŌłÆPMSG (s)1 ŌłÆ YDŌłÆPMSG (s)kHNF (s)( Rgrid + jŽē r Lgrid ) ,

(10) 

where k determines the effect of D-PMSGŌĆÖs impedance reshaping. It is noted that k is the only parameter that needs to be tuned in the proposed method. Fig. 6 displays the Bode diagram of the designed NF, where G0 = 1 and ╬Š = 0.01 . In the frequency band other than the fundamental frequency (50Hz), it can be considered that the amplitude of NF is 1 and the phase is 0. Therefore, it is believed that HNF (s) = 1 for the RCs. C. Parameter Tuning For the proposed ARDC, the following parameter tun-ing principles are adopted. 1) The equivalent SISO external impedance (Y1DŌłÆPMSG (s), Y2DŌłÆPMSG (s)) of the D-PMSG are obtained by FS offline. It should be noted that the worst stability scenario where WTs have the largest output should be examined for parameter tuning [16]. This guarantees the ARDC strategyŌĆÖs efficacy in suppressing resonance under various active power conditions. 6

2) The control coefficient k is set online. Assume that the required magnitude margin is m, then 

m = YGRID (jŽē r )(1 ŌłÆ k)Y DŌłÆPMSG (jŽē r ) . (11) Therefore, k can be tuned as 

k = 1 ŌłÆ YGRID (jŽē r )

mYDŌłÆPMSG (jŽē r ) , (12) where YDŌłÆPMSG (j Žēr) is the D-PMSG external character-istic of the resonant point obtained by FS offline and RFE online; YGRID (jŽē r ) is the grid admittance, which can also be measured online by Quadratic Reside Binary (QRB) Sequence method [26], then the control coefficient k can be adjusted online. D. ARDCŌĆÖs Activation and Deactivation The ARDC is supposed to be activated during resonance and deactivated when the resonance conditions disappear. Before activating ARDC, the following situations need to be identified: 1) The system operates stably without RCs; 2) Resonance occurs during the fault but converges afterward; 3) Resonance occurs and does not converge. ARDC should be activated only in the third situation when RCsŌĆÖ magnitude exceeds the threshold. The voltages and currents will contain RCs once reso-nance occurs. In this paper, the current RC i╬▒, r is selected to reflect the resonance dynamics due to its apparent features. Therefore, the ratio r(t) of the RCs to the fundamental current component is used as ARDC start-up index, which can be expressed as 

r(t) = Ar (t)

A0(t) , (13) where Ar (t) and A0(t) represent the amplitude of the RCs and the fundamental component, respectively. r(t)

exceeding the preset threshold is a necessary condition for ARDCŌĆÖs activation. Besides, the ARDC is blocked under fault conditions to avoid false activation. Because the frequency spectrum at the fault stage contains broad-band RCs [16], which may cause r(t) to exceed the preset threshold. In this paper, the ARDC is blocked when the PCC voltage is below 0.8 p.u.. The frequencies and magnitudes of the RCs in the target system can be obtained by real-time FFT analysis [10]. It is recommended to preset Žēr as the frequency corre-sponding to the minimum magnitude margin obtained by the offline FS. Under normal operating conditions, the signal i╬▒, r is minimal and the ARDC does not work. Once resonance occurs, the index r(t) exceeds the threshold and the resonance is non-convergent. Then the designed activation criterion is triggered and the ARDC will mitigate the resonance. On the other hand, the ARDC is deactivated when the resonance cause disappears. The coupling between the grid impedance ZGRID (s) and WF admittance YDŌłÆPMSG (s) is the direct cause of resonance. The former is white box and +] ┬ā 

> (a) +] ┬ā
> (b) Fig. 7. Bode diagrams of the target system after reshaping D-PMSG.

can be directly obtained, while the latter can be derived based on offline FS combined with the WFŌĆÖs topology and the WTsŌĆÖ grid-tied information, including the number and location of WTs connected to the grid. Therefore, when the Bode curves calculated by the grid impedance and WF admittance meet the stability requirements, ARDC is deactivated. The method based on SISO models mentioned in Section II can be adopted, and will not be repeated here. E. Performance Analysis For the instability situation when the grid impedance changes to 1.4Zgrid , k is tuned to 0.5 to guarantee that the magnitude margin is larger than 1.4. 1) Impedance/admittance Reshaping Effect 7,QWURGXFHG E\1)  

> M M
> M M
> Fig. 8. Zero-pole distribution of the target system with/without ARDC.

Bode diagrams of the target system with /without ARDC are shown in Fig. 7, where Y1DŌłÆPMSG (s) and 

Y2DŌłÆPMSG (s) are the D-PMSG admittances without ARDC while Y1,re DŌłÆPMSG (s) and Y2,re DŌłÆPMSG (s) are the D-PMSG admittances with ARDC. It can be seen that after adopting ARDC, the phase characteristics of D-PMSG at the resonance points (23Hz and 77Hz) remain unchanged, and the phase difference with the grid is still 180┬░, while the magnitude characteristics change evidently. Specifically, the magnitude of D-PMSGŌĆÖadmittance at the resonance points is significantly reduced to less than the grid, which changes the magnitude margin of the system to the desired value, meaning that the system stability is effectively enhanced. 2) Closed-Loop Pole Analysis The small-signal stability of the system can be effec-tively assessed through the examination of the system eigenvalues. In the context of the analyzed resonance stability concern, it is imperative to note that the system eigenvalues are in alignment with the poles of the systemŌĆÖs closed-loop transfer function [27, 28]. Consequently, the poles of the systemŌĆÖs closed-loop transfer function are computed both with and without the ARDC in order to evaluate the impact of the proposed control strategy on the systemŌĆÖs stability. Without the ARDC, the closed-loop transfer function of the target system can be denoted as 

Hsys (s) = YDŌłÆPMSG (s)I + Y DŌłÆPMSG (s)Z GRID (s) , (14) while the systemŌĆÖs closed-loop transfer function is 

Hre sys (s) = Yre DŌłÆPMSG (s)I + Y re DŌłÆPMSG (s)Z GRID (s) (15) with the ARDC. Fig. 8 illustrates the zero-pole distribution for Hsys (s)

and Hre sys (s), respectively. It is evident that upon the implementation of ARDC, the dominant poles of the PV    

> PV
> fU +]
> fU +]
> 7KUHVKROG
> DE
> Fig. 9. The frequencies and magnitudes of the RCs in the current.

'HOD\ 

> (a) Active power waveforms

'HOD\    

> (b) Resonance current waveforms in the ╬▒axis Fig. 10. The simulation waveforms with /without ARDC.

system, which are the poles closest to the imaginary axis, relocate towards the negative half of the real axis. The real part of the original systemŌĆÖs dominant pole measures approximately 22 (with a damping of about -10.9%). After applying the ARDC to the system, the real part of the systemŌĆÖs dominant pole becomes approximately -16 (with a damping of about 10.1%), signifying a noteworthy enhancement in the systemŌĆÖs stability. F. Characteristics of ARDC In summary, the proposed ARDC has the following characteristics: 8

1) Simple Structure In ARDC, the additional control loop is structurally simple and contains only a feedback loop. Also, only the control coefficient k needs to be tuned to achieve the impedance reshaping. 2) Flexible Adaptability The proposed ARDC has flexible adaptability for the black-box D-PMSG. It can be applied to the D-PMSGs with different controller structures and parameters by adding the external control loop outside the controller. 3) Strong Robustness ARDC is robust because it is parameterized based on the worst-condition stability and the activation criterion is set to prevent its false activation. IV. Simulation Validation The effect of the proposed ARDC is first verified by the time-domain simulations. The target D-PMSG grid-tied system is built on the PSCAD/EMTDC simulation platform. When the grid impedance is changed from 1.2Zgrid to 

1.4Zgrid (Zgrid = 0 .0012 + j0.025╬® ) at 0.1s, the resonance occurs. The frequencies and magnitudes of the RCs in the current at PCC are shown in Fig. 9. As seen from the figure, the resonance frequencies are 25/26Hz and 74/75Hz, and the magnitude of 74/75Hz resonance is stronger, which is consistent with the theoretical analysis in Subsection II-B. The resonance magnitude trend of the system is shown in Fig. 9(b), and the threshold is set to 3% of the fundamental component. It can be seen that the resonance magnitude increases after the grid impedance changes, and it exceeds the threshold within 150ms. To ensure that the RFE can output the resonance frequency Žēr , ARDC is set to start up after a delay of 150ms, which is sufficient for online frequency estimation [29, 30]. Fig. 10 presents the simulation waveforms with /without ARDC. The resonance occurs in the system after increas-ing the grid impedance to 1.4Zgrid , and the resonance tends to diverge without ARDC. When adopting ARDC, the resonance converges after the delay, and the resonance completely disappears at about 0.7s. It indicates the ef-fectiveness of the proposed ARDC for damping resonance. V. Controller Hardware-in-Loop Experiments To confirm the effectiveness of the proposed ARDC for the grey-box D-PMSG system, the target system is                 

> TABLE II Some parameters of the D-PMSG grid-connected system on RTDS Parameter Symbol Value Rated voltage of power grid Ugrid 35kV Rated Voltage of D-PMSG UD-PMSG 0.69kV Rated Power S2.1MVA Rated Frequency f150Hz Equivalent Reactance of Transformer ZT0.06p.u. Grid Resistance Rgrid 0.011 ╬®
> Grid Inductance Lgrid 0.025H 306*

%ODFNER[ &RQWUROOHU 

> *5,'

(WKHUQHW 

> $2
> '2
> ',
> $QDORJ %RDUG
> 'LJLWDO %RDUG
> 3RZHU 8QLW

57'6 306*&RQWUROOHU 

> 3K\VLFDO &RQQHFWLRQ

,QWHUIDFH 

> $5'&

vDEF iDEF 

vDEFU 

> 6ZLWFKLQJVLJQDOV

$5'& $GGLWLRQDO5HVRQDQFH'DPSLQJ&RQWURO 

6ZLWFKLQJVLJQDOV LQFOXGHDFWLYDWLRQGHDFWLYDWLRQVLJQDOV 

57'6 5HDO7LPH'LJLWDO6LPXODWRU 

> %DFNWREDFNFRQYHUWHU
> (a) Hardware connection %UHDNHU VWDWXVVLJQDOV

56&$'  

> :LQGWXUELQHPRGHO
> CB
> iDEF vDEF
> vGF

57'6 '$ $'ERDUGV *7$2 *7', *7'2  

> 06& *6&
> $QDORJ VLJQDOV

&RQWUROOHU 

8QNQRZQVWUXFWXUH DQGSDUDPHWHUV    

> &RQYHUWHU PRGXODWLRQVLJQDOV
> 06& *6& PRGXODWLRQVLJQDOV
> 9ROWDJH &XUUHQW
> 6WDWXVVLJQDOV
> $5'&
> (b) Signal connection Fig. 11. Schematic diagram of the D-PMSG system on the CHIL experimental platform.

built on a CHIL experimental platform, with its schematic diagram shown in Fig. 11, including the hardware and signal connections. Some parameters are shown in TABLE II. The controller of D-PMSG adopts the real controller produced by NARI Tech. in China, and the controller is a black box. The rest of the target system, such as the wind turbine, the permanent-magnet machine, the transmission line, the transformer, and the ARDC loop, are simulated on the real-time digital simulator (RTDS). The RTDS utilized in this study makes use of PB5 processor cards to replicate the power system network on a Real-Time Operating System (RTOS). Simulations are carried out simultaneously across multiple 1.7 GHz PB5 processor cards using RTOS, thereby creating the 9+]  

>  
> ┬ā
> (a) +]
>  
> ┬ā
> (b) Fig. 12. Bode diagram of the target system without/with ARDC in the CHIL experiment. Circle: without ARDC; Cross: with ARDC.

impression that the power system simulation output is executing in real time [31]. During the CHIL experiment, simulations operate with a standard time step of 50 microseconds for real-time processing. Physical interfacing between the RTDS and the actual D-PMSG controller is facilitated through GTAO, GTDO, and GTDI boards, with software RSCAD responsible for signal configuration and retrieval from the RTDS, as shown in Fig. 11(b). Additionally, information exchange between the computer, RTDS, and the D-PMSG controller occurs via Ethernet, thereby ensuring the highest possible reliability of the validation results. The D-PMSG is a black-box device and its exter-nal characteristics, including Y11 DŌłÆPMSG (s), Y12 DŌłÆPMSG (s),

Y21 DŌłÆPMSG (s) and Y22 DŌłÆPMSG (s), can be obtained by FS [19], then the SISO models of the black-box device can be calculated through Eqs. (3) and (4). Since the grid is a white box, one can directly get its external characteristics, Y1GRID (s) and Y2GRID (s). Fig. 12 displays the Bode diagrams of the equivalent SISO models of the system with/without ARDC. It can be seen that the system without ARDC is in a critical stable state under this condition, and the potential resonant frequency is 20/80Hz. In Fig. 12(a), the phase difference at the magnitude intersection of Y1DŌłÆPMSG (s)

and Y1GRID (s) is exactly 180┬░, and the corresponding frequency is about 80Hz; in Fig. 12(b), when the frequency is 20Hz, the phase difference between Y2DŌłÆPMSG (s) and 

Y2GRID (s) is 180┬░, and the two exactly intersect. Set the required magnitude margin as 1.6 and the control coefficient k can be adjusted based on this. From the swept reshaped model ( Y1,re DŌłÆPMSG , Y2,re DŌłÆPMSG ) in Fig. 12, the phase characteristics of D-PMSG are almost unaffected after using ARDC, but noticeable changes are observed in the magnitude characteristics. Specifically, the admittance magnitude of the resonant frequency 20/80Hz significantly decreases, resulting in a reshaped magnitude margin of approximately 1.7, which is roughly consistent with the required magnitude margin. Scenario 1: Change the grid impedance from Zgrid to 1.375 Zgrid at 1s, which means that the short circuit ratio (SCR) of the system has changed from 1.8 to 1.3. The waveforms of current, voltage, active power, and reactive power for the WF transmission line are illustrated in Fig. 13(a-d). Meanwhile, the waveforms of the variables relating to the WT itself are depicted in Fig. 13(e-h), including the WT terminal voltage, WT current, WT DC voltage, and WT rotor speed. When the grid impedance increases, significant resonance occurs in the target sys-tem without ARDC, and the current resonance is more obvious than the voltage resonance. Correspondingly, the active/reactive power appears to resonate. Fig. 14 displays i╬▒, r during the resonance process, in-cluding the waveform in Fig. 14(a), and the corresponding frequencies and magnitudes obtained by RFE in Fig. 14(b). It can be seen that about 140ms after the impedance increases, the RFE identifies that the system resonance frequency is 18 Hz, and the RCŌĆÖs magnitude is about 3% of the fundamental component, which satisfies the ARDC activation condition. When reaching the constant-magnitude resonance stage, the resonant frequencies of the system is 19/81Hz according to the FFT analysis of the 2.2-2.5s data in Fig. 15, which is consistent with the stability analysis results in Fig. 12. From Figs. 13-15, it can be seen that the resonance is effectively damped for the target system with the ARDC. Meantime, the FFT analysis results show that the voltage and current do not contain RCs. Note that the resonance converges rapidly after a Delay in Fig. 13(c). The Delay, set to 150ms here, should be greater than the estimation time of the RFE for the RCs. Scenario 2: 10 F

H IJ K

D E

G    

> :)FXUUHQW N$
> :)YROWDJH N9
> Fig. 13. Experimental waveforms of RTDS for increasing grid impedance from Zgrid to 1.375 Zgrid .

At 1s, the grid impedance is adjusted to 1.1 Zgrid 

(SCR=1.63), 1.25 Zgrid (SCR=1.44) and 1.5 Zgrid 

(SCR=1.2), respectively. The transmitted active power waveforms of the system with /without ARDC are present in Fig. 16. With the increase of grid impedance, different degrees of resonances occur in the target system without ARDC. The grid impedance of 1.1 Zgrid does not cause system resonance and ARDC doesnŌĆÖt work. When the grid impedance further increases, significant resonance occurs. One can see that the greater the grid impedance increases, the larger the amplitude of the system resonance, which indicates that a weaker grid implies poorer stability. In Figs. 16(b) and 16(c), ARDC can effectively damp the resonance, which demonstrates the effectiveness of the method in damping the resonance under the increasing grid impedance condition. Scenario 3: The number of grid-connected D-PMSGs is changed from 8 to 9, 11, and 13 respectively at 1s, and the damping effect of the proposed ARDC on resonance under different numbers of grid-connected D-PMSG units is studied. The transmitted active power waveforms with /without ARDC are present in Fig. 17. The system remains stable When the grid-connected D-PMSG number is changed to 9 (SCR=1.6), while resonance occurs when the number is altered to 11 (SCR=1.3) and 13 (SCR=1.1). The latter case has a more pronounced resonance phenomenon. In contrast, in the system containing ARDC, the resonance at the early stage 11 

> (a) Time-domain waveform

PV fU +] 

fU +] 

    

> (b) Frequency and Magnitude Fig. 14. The waveform i╬▒, rin the experiment .

+] +] 

+] +]  

> Fig. 15. FFT analysis of the experimental waveforms.

is effectively suppressed, thus avoiding the occurrence of system instability. In summary, the proposed ARDC can effectively damp the resonance of the grey-box D-PMSG WF integrated into the weak grid in different scenarios. VI. Discussion A. Verification Under Faults The three-phase short-circuit fault condition at the PCC is adopted to verify the robustness of the ARDCŌĆÖs activation. Based on the analysis in ref. [16], the relevant times and their ranges are listed in TABLE III. After a fault occurs, there may be two situations: 1) Relay protection operates within tf, which is less than 100 ms. Since ARDC activation time is 150 ms, ARDC will not start up under such scenarios; 2) The system recovers after a transient fault, in which situation the conventional damping scheme is prone to false start. The experimental waveforms in the second situation are shown in Fig. 18. DEF                   

> Fig. 16. The transmitted active power waveforms of the system with/without ARDC under different grid impedances. (a) Zgrid ŌåÆ
> 1.1 Zgrid ; (b) Zgrid ŌåÆ1.25 Zgrid ; (c) Zgrid ŌåÆ1.5 Zgrid .TABLE III The relevant times and their ranges Symbol Meaning Range
> tfthe time of fault duration <100ms
> tdthe decay time of RCs related to Žätsthe start-up time of ARDC 150ms
> tethe time delay of RFE <150ms
> Žäis the system time constant [20].

Scenario 4: A three-phase fault occurs at 1s ( t1) and the fault duration time is 40ms (tf), after which the fault is eliminated. From the i╬▒, r waveform, the decay time of the RCs is 60ms ( td). Although the RFE identifies the system as containing the RC of approximately 32Hz after 106ms (te), ARDC will not be activated because the maximum resonance magnitude is 0.017 (less than the threshold value of 0.03). It is worth noting that during the fault period (from t1 to t2), the ARDC is blocked and the data used for real-time FFT analysis are set to 0. Furthermore, in light of that three-phase faults repre-sent the most severe form of disturbance, the RCs resulting 12                          

> TABLE IV Comparison Between ARDC with the Existing Resonance Damping Methods Methods Description Support grey-box system No primary equipment required Support online tuning Ref. [13] Grid side compensation control ├ŚŌłÜ├Ś
> Ref. [17] A novel phase-locked loop ├ŚŌłÜŌłÜ
> Ref. [16] Additional control inside the controller ├ŚŌłÜŌłÜ
> Refs. [10, 11] Grid-side damping controller ŌłÜ├ŚŌłÜ
> This paper Additional control outside the controller ŌłÜŌłÜŌłÜDEF
> Fig. 17. The transmitted active power waveforms of the system with/without ARDC under different D-PMSG grid-tied numbers.(a) 8ŌåÆ9; (b) 8 ŌåÆ11; (c) 8 ŌåÆ13.

from other faults and perturbations are expected to be below the threshold value. Upon the occurrence of an unbalanced fault, the magnitudes of RCs are observed to be smaller compared to those arising from three-phase faults, as evidenced in Fig. 19. The figure depicts the WT terminal voltage, i╬▒, r, and the magnitude of the maximum RC under various unbalanced fault conditions. It indicates that the activation criterion avoids the false activation of ARDC under the fault and perturbation conditions. t t t t t

tI

tG

tV

tH

%ORFNHG  

+] 

7LPH V     

> Fig. 18. CHIL experimental waveforms during the three-phase fault.
> t1: 1s; t2: 1.04s; t3: 1.1s; t4: 1.146s; t5: 1.19s.

B. Method Comparison The proposed ARDC is compared with the existing res-onance damping approaches for D-PMSG systems across three key dimensions: its suitability for grey-box systems incorporating black-box controllers (scenario applicabil-ity), the requirement for primary equipment (economy), and its support for online tuning (flexibility). The com-parative findings are outlined in TABLE IV. Most of the existing resonance damping methods are found to inadequately address the resonance damping requirements of grey-box D-PMSG grid-tied systems. Notably, the method proposed in refs. [10, 11] can apply to the control of grey-box systems by installing a damping controller on the WT grid side for resonance suppression. By comparing the grid side damping controller (GSDC) based method with the proposed ARDC, one can find that GSDC is the control of the WF level, while ARDC is the control of the WT level. Both methods can ad-dress the problem that the WTsŌĆÖ control structure and parameters cannot be obtained in practical engineering, and can enable online parameter tuning to match changes in resonance frequency. Admittedly, the ARDC requires 13 %ORFNHG  

> E /LQHWROLQHIDXOW

%ORFNHG  

> D 6LQJOHOLQHWRJURXQGIDXOW
> F 'RXEOHOLQHWRJURXQGIDXOW

%ORFNHG  

t t  

> Fig. 19. Experimental waveforms under different unbalanced faults.
> t1: 1s; t2: 1.04s.

control modifications to the WTs in the target WF, but it is a common limitation of the WT-level resonance control [13, 16, 17]. The distinction between GSDC and ARDC lies in that implementing GSDC necessitates primary equipment, potentially leading to reduced cost-effectiveness. Addition-ally, due to the limited capacity of GSDC equipment, its ability to dampen resonance is also constrained. Fig. 20 illustrates a severe resonance case in a D-PMSG system, where the capacity of GSDC is set at 10% of the entire WF, which is actually excessive [10]. In this scenario, 'HOD\ 7ULSSLQJ  

> Fig. 20. Damping effect comparison of different control methods. GSDC: the method in Refs. [10, 11].

it is evident that GSDC can only suppress resonance divergence to a certain extent, while the proposed ARDC can successfully suppress the resonance. VII. Conclusion The paper introduces a novel additional resonance damping control (ARDC) designed specifically for the D-PMSG WF integrated weak grid. This control approach achieves effective resonance damping through impedance reshaping of the grey-box D-PMSG containing the black-box controller, which consists of a simple filter and a compensation loop in the ╬▒╬▓ -frame outside the controller. The ARDC exhibits great effectiveness in suppressing resonance. The parameter tuning is conducted under the worst stability conditions to ensure its effectiveness at various operating points. Experimental results indicate that ARDC significantly increases the stability magnitude margin, from the critical state to 1.7. Even under severe resonance conditions with a low short-circuit ratio of 1.1, the ARDC successfully suppresses system resonance. The ARDC exhibits favorable robustness against faults. An activation strategy has been designed for the ARDC to prevent incorrect start-up under faults. Experimental results show that, under balanced/unbalanced faults, the ARDC reliably remains inactive and the non-fundamental electrical components during the fault recovery do not trigger the ARDC. Future explorations will focus on extending the reso-nance damping strategy to encompass other full-power inverter-based grid-tied systems based on the proposed control. References [1] H. Liu, X. Xie, J. He, T. Xu, Z. Yu, C. Wang, and C. Zhang, ŌĆ£Subsynchronous Interaction Between Direct-Drive PMSG Based Wind Farms and Weak AC Networks,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 4708ŌĆō4720, 2017. [2] Y. Li, L. Fan, and Z. Miao, ŌĆ£Wind in Weak Grids: Low-Frequency Oscillations, Subsynchronous Oscil-lations, and Torsional Interactions,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 109ŌĆō118, 2020. 14 

[3] E. Ebrahimzadeh, F. Blaabjerg, X. Wang, and C. L. Bak, ŌĆ£Harmonic Stability and Resonance Analysis in Large PMSG-Based Wind Power Plants,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 12ŌĆō23, 2018. [4] L. Fan and Z. Miao, ŌĆ£Wind in Weak Grids: 4 Hz or 30 Hz Oscillations?ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 5803ŌĆō5804, 2018. [5] W. Liu, J. Shair, S. Wu, and X. Xie, ŌĆ£Oscillatory Stability Region Analysis of Black-Box CIGs,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Power Electron., vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 8780ŌĆō8784, 2022. [6] M. Amin and M. Molinas, ŌĆ£A Gray-Box Method for Stability and Controller Parameter Estimation in HVDC-Connected Wind Farms Based on Non-parametric Impedance,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 1872ŌĆō1882, 2019. [7] H. A. Mohammadpour, M. M. Islam, E. Santi, and Y.-J. Shin, ŌĆ£SSR Damping in Fixed-Speed Wind Farms Using Series FACTS Controllers,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Power Deliv., vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 76ŌĆō86, 2016. [8] G. Li, Y. Chen, A. Luo, and X. Liu, ŌĆ£Wideband Harmonic Voltage Feedforward Control Strategy of STATCOM for Mitigating Subsynchronous Reso-nance in Wind Farm Connected to Weak Grid and LCC HVDC,ŌĆØ IEEE J. Emerging Sel. Top. Power Electron., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 4546ŌĆō4557, 2021. [9] G. Li, Y. Chen, A. Luo, and H. Wang, ŌĆ£An Enhancing Grid Stiffness Control Strategy of STATCOM/BESS for Damping Sub-Synchronous Resonance in Wind Farm Connected to Weak Grid,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf., vol. 16, no. 9, pp. 5835ŌĆō5845, 2020. [10] J. Shair, X. Xie, H. Li, W. Zhao, and W. Liu, ŌĆ£A Grid-side Multi-modal Adaptive Damping Control of Super-/Sub-synchronous Oscillations in Type-4 Wind Farms Connected to Weak AC Grid,ŌĆØ Electr. Power Syst. Res., vol. 215, p. 108963, 2023. [11] X. Zhang, X. Xie, J. Shair, H. Liu, Y. Li, and Y. Li, ŌĆ£A Grid-Side Subsynchronous Damping Controller to Mitigate Unstable SSCI and Its Hardware-in-the-loop Tests,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 1548ŌĆō1558, 2020. [12] G. Li, W. Wang, C. Liu, Y. Jin, H. Nian, and G. He, ŌĆ£ Mechanism Analysis and Suppression Method of Wideband Oscillation of PMSG Wind Farms Con-nected to Weak Grid (Part II): Suppression Method of Wideband Oscillation Based on Impedance Re-shaping,ŌĆØ Proc CSEE, vol. 39, no. 6908-6920+7104, 2019. [13] H. Jiang, C. Yi, C. Shi, H. Yang, M. Li, and X. Zhang, ŌĆ£Suppression of Sub-synchronous Oscilla-tion in Direct-drive Permanent Magnet Wind Turbine Based on Generator-side Converter Compensation Control,ŌĆØ in Asia Conf. Energy Electr. Eng. 2022, 2022, pp. 113ŌĆō117. [14] X. Zhang, M. Li, and D. Xu, ŌĆ£PCC Voltage Pertur-bation Path Analysis and Compensation for Grid-Connected Voltage-Source Converter Under Weak Grid,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 68, no. 12, pp. 12 331ŌĆō12 339, 2021. [15] M. Li, X. Zhang, Z. Guo, J. Wang, Y. Wang, F. Li, and W. Zhao, ŌĆ£The Control Strategy for the Grid-Connected Inverter Through Impedance Reshaping in q-Axis and its Stability Analysis Under a Weak Grid,ŌĆØ IEEE J. Emerging Sel. Top. Power Electron., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 3229ŌĆō3242, 2021. [16] S. Yang, R. Shen, J. Shu, T. Zhang, Y. Li, B. Zhang, and Z. Hao, ŌĆ£PLL Based Sub-/Super-Synchronous Resonance Damping Controller for D-PMSG Wind Farm Integrated Power Systems,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. En-ergy Convers., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 2370ŌĆō2384, 2022. [17] G. Li, Y. Chen, A. Luo, and Y. Wang, ŌĆ£An Inertia Phase Locked Loop for Suppressing Sub-Synchronous Resonance of Renewable Energy Generation System Under Weak Grid,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 4621ŌĆō4631, 2021. [18] X. Wu, S. Xu, X. Shi, M. Shahidehpour, M. Wang, and Z. Li, ŌĆ£Mitigating Subsynchronous Oscillation Using Model-Free Adaptive Control of DFIGs,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 242ŌĆō253, 2023. [19] N. Cifuentes, M. Sun, R. Gupta, and B. C. Pal, ŌĆ£Black-Box Impedance-Based Stability Assessment of Dynamic Interactions Between Converters and Grid,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 2976ŌĆō 2987, 2022. [20] T. Zhang, Z. Hao, S. Yang, H. Ma, and B. Zhang, ŌĆ£An Argument-Principle Based Stability Assessment Method for Grey-Box DFIG Systems,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Energy Convers., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 2499ŌĆō2513, 2023. [21] W. Zhou, Y. Wang, P. Cai, and Z. Chen, ŌĆ£A Gray-Box Impedance Reshaping Method of Grid-Connected Inverter for Resonance Damping,ŌĆØ in Int. Conf. Power Electron. 2019 - ECCE Asia, 2019, pp. 2660ŌĆō2667. [22] Y. Xu, H. Nian, and L. Chen, ŌĆ£Small-Signal Modeling and Analysis of DC-Link Dynamics in Type-IV Wind Turbine System,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 1423ŌĆō1433, 2021. [23] H. Nian, L. Chen, Y. Xu, H. Huang, and J. Ma, ŌĆ£Sequences Domain Impedance Modeling of Three-Phase Grid-Connected Converter Using Harmonic Transfer Matrices,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Energy Convers., vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 627ŌĆō638, 2018. [24] B. Liu, Z. Li, X. Dong, S. S. Yu, X. Chen, A. M. T. Oo, X. Lian, Z. Shan, and X. Liu, ŌĆ£Impedance Modeling and Controllers Shaping Effect Analysis of PMSG Wind Turbines,ŌĆØ IEEE J. Emerging Sel. Top. Power Electron., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 1465ŌĆō1478, 2021. [25] C. Zhang, X. Cai, A. Rygg, and M. Molinas, ŌĆ£Se-quence Domain SISO Equivalent Models of a Grid-Tied Voltage Source Converter System for Small-Signal Stability Analysis,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Energy Con-vers., vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 741ŌĆō749, 2018. [26] S. Kamala, N. B. Y. Gorla, and S. K. Panda, ŌĆ£Small-Signal Stability Improvement of Microgrid With Bat-tery Energy Storage System Based on Real-Time Grid 15 

Impedance Measurement,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl., vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 2537ŌĆō2546, 2022. [27] L. H. Bezerra and N. Martins, ŌĆ£Eigenvalue Meth-ods for Calculating Dominant Poles of a Transfer Function and Their Applications in Small-Signal Stability,ŌĆØ Appl. Math. Comput., vol. 347, pp. 113ŌĆō 121, 2019. [28] T. Zhang, Z. Hao, H. Ma, S. Yang, and C. Li, ŌĆ£Dominant Mode Identification for Grey-box Grid-tied Converters,ŌĆØ Electr. Power Syst. Res., vol. 228, p. 110038, 2024. [29] L. Chen, W. Zhao, F. Wang, Q. Wang, and S. Huang, ŌĆ£An Interharmonic Phasor and Frequency Estimator for Subsynchronous Oscillation Identification and Monitoring,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 68, no. 6, pp. 1714ŌĆō1723, 2019. [30] J. Shair, X. Xie, L. Yuan, Y. Wang, and Y. Luo, ŌĆ£Monitoring of subsynchronous oscillation in a series-compensated wind power system using an adaptive extended Kalman filter,ŌĆØ IET Renew. Power Gener., vol. 14, no. 5, 2021. [31] A. Sharma, S. C. Srivastava, and S. Chakrabarti, ŌĆ£Testing and Validation of Power System Dynamic State Estimators Using Real Time Digital Simulator (RTDS),ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 2338ŌĆō2347, 2016.                        

> Tao Zhang (SŌĆÖ20) received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from XiŌĆÖan Jiaotong University, XiŌĆÖan, China in 2017. And he is currently pursuing a Ph.D. degree on electrical engineering in XiŌĆÖan Jiaotong University. His research interest includes small-signal stability analysis and control of renewable energy power systems.
> Songhao Yang (SŌĆÖ18-MŌĆÖ19) was born in Shan-dong, China, in 1989. He received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the XiŌĆÖan Jiaotong University, XiŌĆÖan, China, in 2012 and 2019, respectively. Besides, he received the Ph.D. degree in electrical and electronic engineering from Tokushima Uni-versity, Japan, in 2019. Currently, he is an Associate Professor at XiŌĆÖan Jiaotong University. His research inter-est includes power system stability analysis and control. 16

Zhiguo Hao (MŌĆÖ10-SMŌĆÖ23) was born in Ordos, China, in 1976. He received his B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from XiŌĆÖan Jiaotong University, XiŌĆÖan, China, in 1998 and 2007, respectively. He has been a Professor with the Electri-cal Engineering Department, XiŌĆÖan Jiaotong University since 2018. His research interest in-cludes protection and control of power systems and equipment. 

Hongyue Ma (SŌĆÖ23) received the B.S. degree from Harbin University of Science and Tech-nology, Harbin, China in 2015, and M.S. de-gree from XiŌĆÖan Jiaotong University, XiŌĆÖan, China in 2020, where she is working toward a Ph.D degree, all in electrical engineering. Her research interest includes renewable en-ergy power system analysis and protection. 

Baohui Zhang (SMŌĆÖ99-FŌĆÖ19) was born in Hebei Province, China, in 1953. He received the M.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engi-neering from XiŌĆÖan Jiaotong University, XiŌĆÖan, China, in 1982 and 1988, respectively. He has been a Professor in the Electrical Engineering Department at XiŌĆÖan Jiaotong University since 1992. His research interests are power system analysis, control, communi-cation, and protection.