Title: 2604.16761v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.16761v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 00:25:45 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
A Control -Oriented  Framework for Coupling Physics -Based and Data -

# Driven Models 

Leeroy Makusha , Preston Abadie , Donald J. Docimo 

Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering , Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX 79 407, USA 

(email:  Leeroy.Makusha@ttu.edu , Preston.Abadie@ttu.edu , Donald.Docimo@ttu.edu )

Abstract : Design, control, and estimation for dynamic systems require accurate and analytically tractable 

models . However, modern engineered systems contain components that are described with heterogeneous 

modeling paradigms , as well as subsystems that are challenging to model from physics alone. There have 

been significant efforts to address this through heterogeneous coupling frameworks and data -driven 

modeling. However, these two paths have been pursued in parallel. This work bridges this gap by 

introducing a control -oriented framework to couple physics -based and data -driven models. A physics -based 

microgrid with a data -driven data center load model is used to demonstrate the proposed four step 

methodology . Application of the framework yields a coupled system that allow s for rigorous assessment of 

control properties . Equilibrium and stability tests are conducted, and they both reveal that the coupling 

structure and function s play a critical role in determin ing physically mean in gful equilibrium points and 

stability o f the integrated system. This information could only be accessed through the proposed framework, 

highlighting its importance. 

Keywords : modeling , physics -based, data -driven,  stability , microgrid, data center 

1. INTRODUCTION 

Predictive models play a key role in control, estimation, and design processes for dynamic systems. While specifications vary 

by application, a common requirement is that the selected model paradigm facilitates analysis – the ubiquity of state space 

repres entations arguably comes from the inherent ability to quantify stability, controllability, and observability. A second 

common requirement is that predictions produced by the model are sufficiently accurate. However, meeting these requirements 

is progressiv ely challenging . Consider microgrids, electric vehicles, and data centers , all with increasingly complex physical 

designs and controllers implemented in pursuit of higher measures of efficiency. The addition of new components to these 

systems leads to (i) nonlinear , uncertain , or poorly understood behavior and (ii) subsystems captured through different modeling 

paradigms. To address these challenges and continue to meet the two common requirements, research efforts have explored data -

driven modeling and heterogeneous model coupling .

Data -driven modeling methods are widely used to address the first challenge and  improve predictive accuracy when 

mathematical representation of behavior is in complete (Zhou et al. , 2022) . Black -box models are appropriate when there is no 

physical insight . Such data -reliant approach es have been applied successfully to various fields, including finance, healthcare, 

computer vision, and control engineering (Ljung, 2001; Guidotti et al. , 2019; Hassija et al. , 2024) . Grey -box models are an 

option when some physical insight is available, but several parameters remain to be determined from observed data . Techniques 

for this have been refined, from early neural network -augmented first -principles models (Psichogios and Ungar, 1992) to modern 

physics informed neural networks (Mousavi et al. , 2025) . Similar ideas have been applied to energy systems, such as grid -

connected inverter modeling where power electronic dynamics and physical constraints are integrated into the learning process 

(Al Mahdouri et al., 202 5). 

Heterogeneous model coupling techniques provide structure to address the second challenge and connect subsystem models 

describing different domains.  Coupling provides a more complete picture of how the dynamic system behaves.  Multiphysics 

modeling encapsulates a broad number of methods to interconnect models, often with coupled representations having a 

differential algebraic equation (DAE) structure (Samin et al. , 2007; Kolmbauer et al. , 2022) . Bond graphs and graph -based 

models represent multi -domain systems through energy -based interconnection structures that describe the flow and 

transformation of power between system componen ts (Gawthrop and Bevan, 2007; Ouedraogo and Docimo, 2025) . Port -

Hamiltonian formulations generalize energy -based models by representing multi -domain systems with a framework that 

preserves system structure , power continuity, and passivity (Van Der Schaft and Jeltsema, 2014) .

While significant progress has been made with respect to data -driven modeling and heterogeneous model coupling , these areas 

have largely developed in parallel . A limited number of studies have started to bridge the gap, including efforts toward linear 

system coupling (Xie, Zhang and Ilić, 2012) . This paper further unifies these areas by centering its contributions on coupling 

nonlinear, heterogeneous models, including physics -based representations and a class of data -driven artificial neural networks 

(ANNs). To this end, a step -by -step framework is developed to transform the models, connect them, and, most critically, facilitate control -oriented analysis of the coupled dynamic systems. The proposed framework is applied to a microgrid powering a data 

center, which supports identification of key insights regarding how coupling terms influence dynamic behavior. 

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, an overview of the motivating energy system problem is 

provided, alongside data -driven and physics -based subsystem models. Section 3 presents the model coupling framework and 

applies it to the energy system models. Section 4 provides analysis of the coupled data -driven and physics -based system model. 

In Section 5, insights drawn from the study are summarized .

2. PRO BLEM STATEMENT 

To elucidate on the need for extensions to model coupling methods, an example energy system problem is defined. Consider a 

control engineer tasked with maintain ing the stable operation of a microgrid using a model -based controller . The engineer’s 

company owns the energy generation, storage, and conversion technology, and thus has provided a parameterized equivalent 

circuit model (ECM) . However, the primary connected load is a data center owned by the company’s customer. A physics -based 

model of the load is not available, but the engineer’s colleague fit a data -driven ANN using available input and output load 

measurements. 

This creates a modeling challenge : t he microgrid dynamics are amenable to control -oriented analysis, but the data -driven load 

model is not readily compatible. Coupling these two models becomes nontrivial. The objective of this work is to develop a 

framework that enables engineers in similar situations to this example problem. The framework should not only couple models 

of different forms , but should do so while preserving or furnishing structural properties required for control ler design and 

analysis .

2. 1 Physics -Based Microgrid Model 

Figure 1  presents the microgrid ECM . The model, drawn from (Jahan, Ouedraogo and Docimo, 2024) , contains a battery pack, 

photovoltaic ( PV ) subsystem , power converters , and a voltage bus. Groups of  𝑁 𝑝 = 400  battery cells are connected in parallel 

to make a module, and  𝑁 𝑠 = 100  modules are connected in series to make the battery pack. Each cell ha s a capacity  𝑄 =

1.21 Ah , relaxation capacitance  𝐶 2,𝑏𝑎𝑡 = 15 ,000 F, and resistances  𝑅 1,𝑏𝑎𝑡 = 0.0198 Ω and  𝑅 2,𝑏𝑎𝑡 = 0.2331 Ω. The states 

include the state of charge ( 𝑆𝑂𝐶 ) and the second capacitor’s charge ( 𝑞 2,𝑏𝑎𝑡 ). The battery current  𝐼 𝑏𝑎𝑡  is a function of the open -

circuit voltage curve ( 𝑉 𝑜𝑐  ) presented in (Abadie and Docimo, 2022) . The battery pack dynamics are captured by: 

𝑆𝑂𝐶 ̇ = − 𝐼 𝑏𝑎𝑡  

> 𝑁 𝑝 𝑄

,

𝑞 ̇2,𝑏𝑎𝑡 = − 𝐼 𝑏𝑎𝑡 

> 𝑁 𝑝

− 𝑞 2,𝑏𝑎𝑡 

> 𝑅 2,𝑏𝑎𝑡 𝐶 2,𝑏𝑎𝑡

,

𝐼 𝑏𝑎𝑡 = 𝑁 𝑝 

> 𝑅 1

(𝑉 𝑂𝐶 (𝑆𝑂𝐶 ) + 𝑞 2,𝑏𝑎𝑡 

> 𝐶 2

− 𝑉 𝑏𝑎𝑡 

> 𝑁 𝑠

) .

(1) 

The direct current ( DC ) buck converter steps down the battery voltage  𝑉 𝑏𝑎𝑡  through control of the duty cycle  𝐷 𝑠𝑑  . The converter 

dynamics are described by current  𝐼 𝐿 ,𝑠𝑑  and voltages  𝑉 𝑏𝑎𝑡  and  𝑉 𝑐 2,𝑠𝑑 , correlated with inductance  𝐿 𝑠𝑑 = 1 H and capacitances 

𝐶 1,𝑠𝑑 = 𝐶 2,𝑠𝑑 = 1,000 F. With resistances  𝑅 1,𝑠𝑑 = 𝑅 2,𝑠𝑑 = 10 ,000 Ω, and  𝑅 3,𝑠𝑑 = 0.0050 Ω, the state equations are: 

𝐼 ̇𝐿 ,𝑠𝑑 = 1

> 𝐿 𝑠𝑑

(𝐷 𝑠𝑑 𝑉 𝑏𝑎𝑡 − 𝑅 3,𝑠𝑑 𝐼 𝐿 ,𝑠𝑑 − 𝑉 𝑐 2,𝑠𝑑 ),

𝑉 ̇𝑏𝑎𝑡 = 1

> 𝐶 1,𝑠𝑑

(𝐼 𝑏𝑎𝑡 − 𝐷 𝑠𝑑 𝐼 𝐿 ,𝑠𝑑 − 𝑉 𝑏𝑎𝑡 

> 𝑅 1,𝑠𝑑

) ,

𝑉 ̇𝑐 2,𝑠𝑑 = 1

> 𝐶 2,𝑠𝑑

(𝐼 𝐿 ,𝑠𝑑 − 𝐼 𝐿 2,𝑏𝑢𝑠 − 𝑉 𝑐 2,𝑠𝑑 

> 𝑅 2,𝑠𝑑

) .

(2) 

Figure 1. Microgrid equivalent circui t, with blue for voltages and currents and red for control and exogeneous inputs. Battery  

> Buck converter
> PV Boost converter
> Voltage bus

The PV subsystem consists of  𝑁 𝑃 ,𝑃𝑉 = 100  solar panels in parallel. With each panel producing current  𝐼 𝑃𝑉  , the total current 

injected into the microgrid is  𝑁 𝑃 ,𝑃𝑉 𝐼 𝑃𝑉  . As shown in (3), t he thermal dy namics of a PV panel describe how its temperature  𝑇 𝑃𝑉 

evolves as a function of irradiation  𝐺 , ambient temperatur e 𝑇 ∞, and PV voltage  𝑉 𝑃𝑉  . With the nonlinear dependency of  𝐼 𝑃𝑉  on 

𝑉 𝑃𝑉  , 𝑇 𝑃𝑉  , and  𝐺  defined in (Villalva, Gazoli and Filho, 2009) , parameters include thermal capacitance  𝐶 𝑃𝑉 = 4,580 J/K,

absorptivity  𝛼 = 0.7, panel surface area  𝐴 𝑠 = 0.8 m2, and convection coefficient  ℎ = 13 .39 W/(m2K).

𝑇 ̇𝑃𝑉 = 𝛼 𝐴 𝑠 𝐺 −ℎ𝐴 𝑠 (𝑇 𝑃𝑉 −𝑇 ∞)−𝑉 𝑃𝑉 𝐼 𝑃𝑉 (𝑉 𝑃𝑉 ,𝑇 𝑃𝑉 ,𝐺 )

> 𝐶 𝑃𝑉

(3)

The DC boost converter steps PV voltage up through control of the duty cycle  𝐷 𝑠𝑢 . Using the same parameters as the buck 

converter , the dynamics are: 

𝐼 ̇𝐿 ,𝑠𝑢 = 1

> 𝐿 1,𝑠𝑢

(𝑉 𝑃𝑉 − 𝑅 3,𝑠𝑢 𝐼 𝐿 ,𝑠𝑢 − 𝐷 𝑠𝑢 𝑉 𝑐 2,𝑠𝑢 ),

𝑉 ̇𝑃𝑉 = 1

> 𝐶 1,𝑠𝑢

(𝑁 𝑃𝑉 ,𝑃 𝐼 𝑃𝑉 (𝐼 𝑃𝑉 ,𝐺 , 𝑉 𝑃𝑉 ) − 𝐼 𝐿 ,𝑠𝑢 − 𝑉 𝑃𝑉 

> 𝑅 1,𝑠𝑢

) ,

𝑉 ̇𝑐 2,𝑠𝑢 = 1

> 𝐶 2,𝑠𝑢

(𝐷 𝑠𝑢 𝐼 𝐿 ,𝑠𝑢 − 𝐼 𝐿 1,𝑏𝑢𝑠 − 𝑉 𝑐 2,𝑠𝑢 

> 𝑅 2,𝑠𝑢

) .

(4)

The voltage bus acts as the central hub of the microgrid. Two inductances,  𝐿 1,𝑏𝑢𝑠 = 𝐿 2,𝑏𝑢𝑠 = 1 H, are modeled to capture currents 

𝐼 𝐿 1,𝑏𝑢𝑠  and  𝐼 𝐿 2,𝑏𝑢𝑠 . With capacitance  𝐶 𝑏𝑢𝑠 = 100 F and resistances  𝑅 1,𝑏𝑢𝑠 = 𝑅 2,𝑏𝑢𝑠 = 0.0001 Ω for inefficiencies, (5) describes 

the bus dynamics . Equation (5) contains two additional terms that affect bus voltage:  𝐷 𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑 𝐼 𝑂  and  𝐼 𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠  . The first of these terms 

is current draw  𝐼 𝑂  from the microgrid to the data center. The duty cycle  𝐷 𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑  is controlled to regulate electrical power to the 

load,  𝐷 𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑 𝐼 𝑂 𝑉 𝑏𝑢𝑠 . The second of these terms represents unknown and potentially parasitic effects created by connecting to the 

load. 

𝐼 ̇𝐿 1,𝑏𝑢𝑠 = 1

> 𝐿 1,𝑏𝑢𝑠

(𝑉 𝑐 2,𝑠𝑢 − 𝑉 𝑏𝑢𝑠 − 𝑅 1,𝑏𝑢𝑠 𝐼 𝐿 1,𝑏𝑢𝑠 )

𝐼 ̇𝐿 2,𝑏𝑢𝑠 = 1

> 𝐿 2,𝑏𝑢𝑠

(𝑉 𝑐 2,𝑠𝑑 − 𝑉 𝑏𝑢𝑠 − 𝑅 2,𝑏𝑢𝑠 𝐼 𝐿 2,𝑏𝑢𝑠 )

𝑉 ̇𝑏𝑢𝑠 = 1

> 𝐶 𝑏𝑢𝑠

(𝐼 𝐿 1,𝑏𝑢𝑠 + 𝐼 𝐿 2,𝑏𝑢𝑠 − 𝐼 𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠 − 𝐷 𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑 𝐼 O)

(5)

Equation (6) presents a compact version of this ECM’s mathematical representation. The state vector  𝑥 𝑀𝐺  includes the twelve 

terms with time derivatives in (1) -(5), such as  𝑇 𝑃𝑉  and  𝑉 𝑏𝑢𝑠 . The control input vector is  𝑢 𝑀𝐺 = [𝐷 𝑠𝑑 , 𝐷 𝑠𝑢 , 𝐷 𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑 ] and the 

exogeneous input vector is  𝑑 𝑀𝐺 = [𝐺 , 𝑇 ∞, 𝐼 𝑂 , 𝐼 𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠 ]. The vector of functions  𝑓 𝑀𝐺  is obtained from (1) -(5). 

𝑥 ̇𝑀𝐺 = 𝑓 𝑀𝐺 (𝑥 𝑀𝐺 , 𝑢 𝑀𝐺 , 𝑑 𝑀𝐺 ) (6)

2. 2 Data -Driven Load M odel 

Figure 2  presents the feedforward, nonlinear ANN that describes the data center load dynamics. The input  𝑢 𝐷𝐶  represents cooling 

power into the data center  in kW , and the output  𝑦 𝐷𝐶  is the average rack temperature within the data center. At time index  𝑘 , the 

network receives  𝑁  delayed input and output signals, [𝑢 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 −1, … , 𝑢 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 −𝑁 ] and [𝑦 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 −1, … , 𝑦 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 −𝑁 ], which are processed 

through hidden neurons functions [Φ1, … , Φ𝑁 ]. Each neuron computes a nonlinear transformation of a weighted combination of 

the delayed inputs and outputs. The outputs of the hidden neurons are then linearly combined to produce the predicted output 

𝑦 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 .

With the specific network form of Figure 2, only prior output  𝑦 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 −𝑛  cascades down into  Φ𝑛 +1. This is dubbed the waterfall 

ANN (WANN) for short, with dynamics expressed as: 

Figure 2. ANN captur ing data center dynamics. 𝑦 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 = Φ1(𝑦 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 −1, 𝑢 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 −1)

+Φ2(𝑦 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 −2, 𝑦 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 −1, 𝑢 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 −2)

+ ⋯ + Φ𝑁 (𝑦 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 −𝑁 , 𝑦 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 −(𝑁 −1), 𝑢 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 −𝑁 ).

(8)

For the present study,  𝑁 = 3 and the activation functions are: 

Φ1(𝜎 1, 𝜎 2) = 𝑤 12 𝜎 1 + 𝑏 1,

Φ2(𝜎 1, 𝜎 2, 𝜎 3) = 𝑤 21 𝜎 3 

> 1
> 1+exp (−0.5𝜎 2+10 )

,

Φ3(𝜎 1, 𝜎 2, 𝜎 3) = 𝑤 32 𝜎 1 + 𝑏 2.

(9)

with parameters  𝑤 12 = 1, 𝑤 21 = −9.7182 × 10 −6, 𝑤 32 = −1.1106 × 10 −6, 𝑏 1 = 2.2213 × 10 −4, and  𝑏 2 = 2.7766 × 10 −5.

All other weights in Figure 2 are set to zero. The model operates using a fixed timestep  Δ𝑡 = 0.001 s.

3. MODELING FRAMEWORK 

This section presents th e proposed framework to combine and analyze physics -based and data -driven models. The framework is 

composed of four steps: (1) transform the individual subsystem models into matching representations , (2) define coupling terms, 

(3) construct the full y coupled system model , and (4) analyze key control properties. The example energy system problem is 

used to demonstrate the application of the framework. 

3. 1 Step 1: Transform Subsystem Models into Matching Representations 

The framework begins by transform ing all individual subsystem models into the same modeling paradigm . The discrete -time 

state space representation is selected as the target model form due to two reasons: the framework is aimed at facilitating co ntrol -

oriented analysis, and data -driven dynamic models are often obtained in discrete time .

There are a variety of established techniques for extracting state space forms of physics -based models. The model of the 

microgrid in Section 2.1 provides one example, converting the circuit into the state space model of (6) using Kirchoff’s volt age 

and cu rrent laws. Linear and nonlinear partial differential equations can be converted using the Padé approximation and the finite 

difference method, respectively (Rahn and Wang, 2013) , though care should be taken due to the error these can introduce. Once 

a continuous state space model is obtained, the forward Euler method or equivalent can be used to convert to discrete time. 

Ideally, the timestep  Δ𝑡  should be selected to be consistent with other subsystem models. For the microgrid model, (6) is 

converted into the following, with vector of functions  𝐹 𝑀𝐺  :

𝑥 𝑀𝐺 ,𝑘 = 𝑥 𝑀𝐺 ,𝑘 −1 + Δ𝑡 𝑓 𝑀𝐺 (𝑥 𝑀𝐺 ,𝑘 −1, 𝑢 𝑀𝐺 ,𝑘 −1, 𝑑 𝑀𝐺 ,𝑘 −1)

= 𝐹 𝑀𝐺 (𝑥 𝑀𝐺 ,𝑘 −1, 𝑢 𝑀𝐺 ,𝑘 −1, 𝑑 𝑀𝐺 ,𝑘 −1). (10)

The conversion of data -driven models is not always as straightforward. While some are fitted effectively as discrete -time state 

space models with hidden states (Karl et al. , 2017 ) , there are a variety of networks used with machine learning techniques. 

Consider the transformation of the single input, single output WANN of (8). The selection of a set of state variables,  𝑥 𝐷𝐶 =

[𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,1, … , 𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑁 ], to yield a minimal realization is not obvious due to the nonlinearities and multiple input delays. As discussed 

in (Kotta and Sadegh, 2002) , a state space realization is not guaranteed for all but a subset of nonlinear dynamic models. 

Following that paper’s work, the WANN can be shown to fit within a subclass of models that is transformable. The discrete -time 

state space model for (8) is 

𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,1,𝑘 = 𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,2,𝑘 −1 + Φ1,𝑘 −1,

𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,2,𝑘 = 𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,3,𝑘 −1

+Φ2(𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,1,𝑘 −1, 𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,2,𝑘 −1 + Φ1,𝑘 −1, 𝑢 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 −1),

⋮

𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑁 −1,𝑘 = 𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑁 ,𝑘 −1

+Φ𝑁 −1(𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,1,𝑘 −1, 𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,2,𝑘 −1 + Φ1,𝑘 −1, 𝑢 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 −1),

𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑁 ,𝑘 = Φ𝑁 (𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,1,𝑘 −1, 𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,2,𝑘 −1 + Φ1,𝑘 −1, 𝑢 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 −1)

(11)

with  𝑦 𝐷𝐶 = 𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,1 and  Φ1,𝑘 −1 = Φ1(𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,1,𝑘 −1, 𝑢 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 −1). Using  𝐹 𝐷𝐶 , this can be shortened to: 

𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 = 𝐹 𝐷𝐶 (𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 −1, 𝑢 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 −1). (12 )

3. 2 Step 2: Define Coupling Terms The purpose of this step is to establish representations of interact ions among the subsystem models produced through the first 

step . Coupling arises from shared inputs, outputs, and internal variables . For this preliminary version of the framework, four 

guidelines are recommended to retain a manageable scope: 

1.  Each set of coupling terms only involves variables from two models. 

2.  Each coupling term is an equation with a single input variable on the left side. The equation defines how a subsystem 

“receives” effects from another subsystem. 

3.  No input variable acts as a receiver more than once. 

4.  No input variable is a function of itself, whether directly or indirectly through the set of coupling equations. 

To show how these guidelines work, the set of coupling terms for the microgrid and data center models are defined. The coolin g

power input to the data center,  𝑢 𝐷𝐶 , is related to the electrical power supplied through the microgrid’s voltage bus. Equation (13) 

describes the first coupling term, from microgrid to data center, with a constant coefficient of performance ( 𝐶𝑂𝑃 ). Similarly, the 

data center load influences the microgrid through  𝐼 𝑂 . Equation (14) presents the second coupling term, from data center to 

microgrid, with  𝑅 𝐷𝐶  as the effective load resistance of the data center cooling system when it draws power. Note that these 

coupling terms meet all four guidelines. If (14) were to be defined differently, such that  𝐼 𝑂  becomes a function of  𝑢 𝐷𝐶 , that would 

violate the last guideline and create an algebraic relationship. This would need to be solved, either through exact or numeri cal 

methods, to retain the framework’s analysis capabilities. 

𝑢 𝐷𝐶 = 𝐶𝑂𝑃 ⋅ 𝐷 𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑 𝑉 𝑏𝑢𝑠 𝐼 𝑂  (13 )

𝐼 𝑂 = 𝑉 𝑏𝑢𝑠 /𝑅 𝐷𝐶  (14 )

One more coupling term is necessary to connect the microgrid and data center models. The exogeneous input  𝐼 𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠  captures 

additional effects of the data center on the microgrid. This can include current drawn to power auxiliary loads and parasitic terms .

As these can be influenced by the thermal state of the data center, the coupling term is defined as :

𝐼 𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠 = 𝑉 𝑏𝑢𝑠 𝐻 (𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,1), (15 )

with  𝐻  as the inverse of a temperature -dependent impedance . Note that this is not a physical resistor , but rather an aggregated 

interaction captur ing both passive and active electrical effects. 

3. 3 Step 3: Construc t the Full y Coupled Model 

After the subsystem models have been transformed and the coupling terms defined, what follows is construction of coupled 

model describing the full system . The new definitions for input variables, provided by the coupling term equations, are placed 

within the subsystem models. The subsystem state vectors are combined into one vector,  𝑥 . Vectors  𝑢  and  𝑑  are similarly defined, 

excluding inputs replaced through use of the coupling equations. For the microgrid and data center case , the cooling input to the 

data center can be written as :

𝑥 𝑀𝐺 ,𝑘 = 𝐹 𝑀𝐺 (𝑥 𝑀𝐺 ,𝑘 −1, 𝑢 𝑀𝐺 ,𝑘 −1, 𝑑 𝑀𝐺 ,𝑘 −1),

𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 = 𝐹 𝐷𝐶 (𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 −1, 𝐶𝑂𝑃 ⋅ 𝐷 𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑 𝑉 𝑏𝑢𝑠 𝐼 𝑂 ), (16 )

with  𝑑 𝑀𝐺 ,𝑘 −1 = [𝐺 𝑘 −1, 𝑇 ∞,𝑘 −1, 𝑉 𝑏𝑢𝑠 ,𝑘 −1

> 𝑅 𝐷𝐶

, 𝑉 𝑏𝑢𝑠 ,𝑘 =1𝐻 (𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,𝑘 −1)]. This can be summarized as: 

𝑥 𝑘 = 𝐹 (𝑥 𝑘 −1, 𝑢 𝑘 −1, 𝑑 𝑘 −1), (17 )

with  𝑥 = [𝑥 𝑀𝐺 , 𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ], 𝑢 = 𝑢 𝑀𝐺  , and  𝑑 = [𝐺 , 𝑇 ∞].

3. 4 Step 4: Analyze Control Properties 

A coupled model in the form of (17) provides access to all tools appropriate for nonlinear, discrete -time state space models. The 

final step of the framework is to apply these tools as appropriate for the problem at hand.  Table 1  presents a family of suggested 

metrics to serve as a starting point for control -oriented analysis. 4. RESULTS & DISCUSSION 

This section covers the control -oriented analysis of the coupled microgrid and data center system model. The first two analyses 

of Table 1 are performed : equilibrium is determined, and stability is quantified . For this section, coupling parameters are set to 

𝐶𝑂𝑃 = 3.5 and  𝑅 𝐷𝐶 = 3.7 Ω. Two expressions for  𝐻  are utilized, with the equation and curves presented in Figure 3 . Coupling 

Case A uses  𝛾 = 0.005  and Coupling Case B uses  𝛾 = −1. This latter case capture s a scenario where auxiliary loads feed current 

back into the bus at higher rack temperatures. This behavior is analogous to negative incremental impedance effects that ha ve 

been observed in power electronics, where load dynamics can destabilize upstream converters (Emadi et al. , 2006; Singh, Gautam 

and Fulwani, 2017) .

4.1 Equilibrium Analysis 

An equilibrium point is determined by setting  𝑥 𝑘 = 𝑥 𝑘 −1 = 𝑥 ̅ , 𝑢 𝑘 −1 = 𝑢 ̅ , and  𝑑 𝑘 −1 = 𝑑 ̅ . There are five free variables in the 

coupled model, which are set to  𝑢 ̅ = [0.5,0.15 ,1.0] and  𝑑 ̅ = [1000 ,25 ]. Using a combi nation of analytical and numerical 

methods, (17) is solved for these conditions for both coupling cases. In addition, an equilibrium point is also determined fo r the 

uncoupled subsystem models: this requires selection of additional free variables  𝐼 ̅𝑂 = 20 .5 A, 𝐼 ̅𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠 = 0.0165 A, and  𝑢 ̅ 𝐷𝐶 =

31  kW . Table 2 presents values of key states at an equilibrium point identified. 

Two observations of note are extracted from this table. First, coupling the models is necessary to get an accurate view of 

equilibrium, shown by comparing the coupling and uncoupled cases. If the control engineer in this example scenario were to us e

only t he microgrid model, it would be necessary to select  𝐼 ̅𝑂  and  𝐼 ̅𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠  . Knowledge of proper values of these comes from the 

coupling – without it, the engineer is unlikely to select values reflective of realistic conditions. This is why the values are 

significantly different for coupled vs. uncoupled. Second, the form of the coupling terms has a substantial effect on equilibrium, 

shown by comparing the two coupling cases in Table 2. The change in  𝛾  shifts the equilibrium and even provides an indicator 

of the limits of the original subsystem model’s accuracy. For example, consider the  𝑉 𝑏𝑢𝑠  equilibrium value . This is negative for 

Coupling Case B, which is impractical for a real -world scenario: the physical system could break down at this point due to 

unmodeled nonlinearities. This gives reason to explore the stability of the coupled model.                                    

> Analysis Name Method
> Equilibrium Set 𝑥 𝑘 =𝑥 𝑘 −1, select free variables,
> and solve using analytical & numerical
> methods. Compare uncoupled vs.
> coupled model equilibrium points.
> Stability (Local) Determine the Jacobian at equilibrium
> &calculate eigenvalues. Perturb
> coupling terms and observe influence
> on eigenvalues.
> Stability (Global) Construct a Lyapunov function 𝑉 (𝑥 )
> around equilibrium 𝑥 ̅such that 𝑉 (𝑥 )>
> 0for 𝑥 ≠𝑥 ഥand 𝑉 (𝐹 (𝑥 ))−𝑉 (𝑥 )<0
> for all 𝑥 .
> Controllability Linearize around equilibrium ( 𝑥 ̅,

𝑢 ഥ) by 

computing:  𝐴 = ∂𝐹  

> ∂𝑥

, 𝐵 = ∂𝐹 

> ∂𝑢

, and       

> testing rank of controllability matrix:
> 𝒞 =[𝐵 𝐴𝐵 𝐴 2𝐵 ⋯𝐴 𝑛 −1𝐵 ]

Table 1. Suggested analyses to perform using the coupled model            

> Figure 3. Coupling term 𝐻 for the two cases analyzed, A and B.
> 𝐻 (𝑦 𝐷𝐶 )=𝛾 +1.0001
> 1+exp (5(𝑦 𝐷𝐶 −10 ))

4.2 Stability Analysis 

Figure 4  presents a simulation of the models for Coupling Cases A and B, with constant control and exogeneous inputs at  𝑢 ̅

and  𝑑 ̅ . The variation of the coupling term  𝛾  within  𝐻  seems to affect stability of the system . To quantify stability, the eigenvalues 

of the Jacobian of (17),  𝜕𝐹 /𝜕𝑥  evaluated at [𝑥 ̅ , 𝑢 ̅ , 𝑑 ̅ ], are determined. This is an appropriate measure of stability for a nonlinear 

system about equilibrium (Levine, 2011) – for discrete -time systems, eigenvalues need to be within the unit circle for stability. 

Figure 5 presents the eigenvalues for the earlier equilibrium with respect to both coupling cases. From the zoomed -in portion, 

all eigenvalues for Coupling Case A are within the unit circle, indicating stability. However, three eigenvalues are outside the 

unit circle for Coupling Case B, syncing with the unstable trajectory observed in Figure 4. The magnitu de, approximately 

1.000003 , indicates it is a slow growth – this makes sense due to the large energy storage terms available in the microgrid. A 

trend can be extracted, shown in Figure 5’s zoomed -in portion, relating the eigenvalues as a function of  𝛾 . This opens the path 

to a deeper sensitivity analysis if the engineer requires it. 

5.  CONCLUSIONS 

This work introduces and applies a control -oriented framework to couple physics -based models and data -driven models . This 

framework enables unified modeling and systematic analysis of key control properties in heterogeneous dynamic systems . Its 

effectiveness is demonstrated through the integration of a physics -based microgrid model and a data -driven data center load 

model. Equilibrium and stability analyses indicate that the coupling can significantly shift the equilibrium points and, in some 

cases, destabilize the overall system . The framework provides critical insight s for control ler design by revealing system -level 

interactions that would remain hidden without proper coupling .

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Award No. 2324707.                                 

> States
> Coupled A
> (𝜸 =𝟎 .𝟎𝟎𝟓 )
> Coupled B
> (𝜸 =−𝟏 )Uncoupled
> 𝑆𝑂𝐶 [−]0.1876 -0.0769 0.9663
> 𝑉 𝑏𝑎𝑡 [V]232.5424 -0.4114 339.9540
> 𝑉 𝑃𝑉 [V]25.7540 -0.0259 26.1842
> 𝑉 𝑏𝑢𝑠 [V]161.7716 -0.2057 169.9773
> 𝑥 𝐷𝐶 ,1[℃]23.1065 112.5042 21.4308
> Table 2. Value of key states at equilibrium
> Figure 4. Simulation results of the coupled microgrid and data center
> model for case A and case B .

REFERENCES 

Abadie, P.T. and Docimo, D.J. (2022) “A Framework for Analysis of Lithium -Ion Battery Pack Balancing Including Cell 

Parameter Heterogeneity,” IFAC -PapersOnLine 55(36) , pp. 726 –733. 

Docimo, D.J., Ghanaatpishe, M. and Mamun, A. (2017) “Extended Kalman Filtering to estimate temperature and irradiation for 

maximum power point tracking of a photovoltaic module,” Energy , 120, pp. 47 –57. 

Emadi, A. et al. (2006) “Constant power loads and negative impedance instability in automotive systems: Definition, modeling, 

stability, and control of power electronic converters and motor drives,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology , 55(4), 

pp. 1112 –1125. 

Gawthrop, P.J. and Bevan, G.P. (2007) Bond -Graph Modeling IEEE Control Systems Magazine .

Guidotti, R. et al. (2019) “A survey of methods for explaining black box models,” ACM Computing Surveys , 51(5). 

Hassija, V. et al. (2024) “Interpreting Black -Box Models: A Review on Explainable Artificial Intelligence,” Cognitive 

Computation , pp. 45 –74. 

Jahan, T.R., Ouedraogo, A.S. and Docimo, D.J. (2024) “A Study on Control Co -Design for Optimizing Microgrid 

Sustainability,” IFAC -PapersOnLine , pp. 636 –641. 

Jones, A.D. and Underwood, C.P. (2001) A thermal model for photovoltaic systems .

Karl, M., Sölch, M., Bayer, J. and van der Smagt, P. (2017). Deep variational Bayes filters: Unsupervised learning of state space 

models from raw data. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations. 

Kolmbauer, M. et al. (2022) “Multirate DAE -simulation and its application in system simulation software for the development 

of electric vehicles,” Journal of Mathematics in Industry , 12(1). 

Kotta, Ü. and Sadegh, N. (2002) “Two approaches for state space realization of NARMA models: Bridging the gap,” 

Mathematical and Computer Modelling of Dynamical Systems , 8(1), pp. 21 –32. 

Mahdouri, E.A., Al -Abri, S., Yousef, H., Al -Naimi, I. and Obeid, H. (2025) ‘Physics -Informed Neural Networks in Grid -

Connected Inverters: A Review’, Energies, 18(20), p. 5441. 

Ljung, L. (2001) ‘Black -box models from input -output measurements’, Instrumentation and Measurement Technology 

Conference , 1, pp. 138 –146. 

Mousavi, M., Caldwell, C., Baltes, J., Parizad, F.A., Aljasem, M., Lee, B.J. and Karimi, N. (2026) ‘Physics -informed neural 

networks in clean combustion: A pathway to sustainable aerospace propulsion’, Chemical Engineering Research and Design, 

226, pp. 258 –281. 

Levine, W.S. (ed.) (2011) The Control Systems Handbook: Control System Advanced Methods . 2nd edn. Boca Raton, FL: CRC 

Press. 

Ouedraogo, A.S. and Docimo, D.J. (2025) “Emphasizing Electro -Thermal Dynamics for Design, Modeling, and Control of 

Microgrids,” IEEE Access , 13, pp. 134014 –134030. 

Psichogios, D.C. and Ungar, L.H. ( 19 92 ) ‘A Hybrid Neural Network -First Principles Approach to Process Modeling .’

Rahn, C.D. and Wang, C. -Y. (2013) Battery Systems Engineering . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 

Samin, J.C. et al. (2007) “Multiphysics modeling and optimization of mechatronic multibody systems,” Multibody System 

Dynamics , 18(3), pp. 345 –373. 

Singh, S., Gautam, A.R. and Fulwani, D. (2017) “Constant power loads and their effects in DC distributed power systems: A 

review,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews , pp. 407 –421.  

> Figure 5. Eigenvalue stability tests for case A and case B .

Van Der Schaft, A. and Jeltsema, D. (2014) “Port -Hamiltonian systems theory: An introductory overview,” Foundations and 

Trends in Systems and Control , 1(2 –3), pp. 173 –378. 

Villalva M .G., Gazoli J . R. and Filho E . R. (2009) “ Modeling and circuit -based simulation of photovoltaic arrays ,” IEE E.

Xie, L., Zhang, Y. and Ilić, M.D. (2012) “Multi -scale integration of physics -based and data -driven models in power systems,” 

Proceedings - 2012 IEEE/ACM 3rd International Conference on Cyber -Physical Systems, ICCPS 2012 , pp. 129 –137. 

Zhou, J. et al. (2022) “Hybrid Data -Driven Modeling for an AC/DC Power System Considering Renewable Energy Uncertainty,” 

Frontiers in Energy Research , 10.