Title: SolarTformer: A Transformer Based Deep Learning Approach for Short Term Solar Power Forecasting

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.24306v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Apr 2026 01:48:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
## SolarTformer: A Transformer Based Deep Learning Approach for Short Term Solar Power Forecasting 

Ankan Basu, 1, 2, ∗ Jyotiraditya Roy, 3, † Aditya Datta, 3, † Prayas Sanyal, 4, † and Sumanta Banerjee 5

> 1

Positional Astronomy Centre, India Meteorological Department, Kolkata, India 

> 2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India 

> 3

Department of Computer Science and Engineering (Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning), Heritage Institute of Technology, Kolkata, India 

> 4

Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Heritage Institute of Technology, Kolkata, India 

> 5

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Heritage Institute of Technology, Kolkata, India 

Accurate forecasting of solar power output is essential for efficient integration of renewable en-ergy into the grid. In this study, an attention-based deep learning model, inspired by transformer architecture, is used for short-term solar power forecasting. Our proposed model, ”SolarTformer”, is designed to predict solar power output from meteorological data. Unlike traditional models, So-larTformer leverages self-attention mechanisms to effectively capture temporal dependencies and spatial variability in solar irradiance. In addition, the proposed methodology includes feeding power station-specific metadata into the model, which helps to generalize between power stations located at different locations and with different panel configurations and in different seasons. Our experi-ments demonstrate that SolarTformer significantly outperforms previous models on the same data set. In particular, the model exhibits strong performance on both clear and cloudy days, indicating high robustness and generalizability. These findings highlight the potential of attention-based archi-tectures in enhancing the accuracy of solar forecasting, contributing to a more reliable management of renewable energy. 

Keywords: Solar energy; Transformers; Attention; Re-newable Energy; Machine Learning; Time Series Fore-casting 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Photovoltaic (PV) energy is increasingly gaining at-tention as a green and clean renewable alternative to fossil fuels. With ever increasing demands for energy from the global community, a transition from the us-age of conventional fossil fuels to renewable and sus-tainable energy sources is necessary to address pollution and global warming, in addition to optimizing harvest-ing costs. However, the power generated from a PV-generation system can vary intermittently. This is at-tributed to a number of uncontrollable variables, such as time of day, solar panel size, local weather conditions (e.g. solar irradiation patterns, temperature, humidity, wind speed, cloud cover), accumulation of dust, and other technological limitations of the panel [1, 2]. Studies show that our planet receives about 1 .8×10 11 M W power from solar radiation at any given time, with the sun providing an energy intensity of 1376 W/m 2 over the atmosphere of Earth [3, 4]. Therefore, a reliable and accurate method for predict-ing the power generated by terrestrial PV systems be-comes paramount. Segmentation of cloud and satellite algorithms, numerical weather-prediction paradigms are   

> ∗Corresponding Author: ankanb.cse.pg@jadavpuruniversity.in
> †Equal Contribution

often complicated, time-consuming, and prohibitively ex-pensive to be relied upon for PV output prediction. More so, these methodologies are often rendered infeasible for rural PV stations [5]. As the influence of a large number of variables can often lead to sudden, unpredicted dips or surges in power, systematic forecasting of such behav-iors can help optimize the output through significant re-ductions in associated uncertainties of the whole subsys-tem, while reducing costs. Several time-series forecasting methodologies have been tried over the years to predict PV output power, but such (forecasting) pipelines often have low accuracy and throughput due to spatiotempo-ral fluctuations in solar irradiance [6]. The majority of traditional techniques for power prediction rely on mul-tivariate regression [6–8], which necessitates gathering a significant number of pertinent data points, which in-clude temperature, electricity-generation rates, and local insolation. For the purpose of time series classification, when label information for certain data points is absent, inclusion of reference data is often necessary [9]. In this paper, to address all these challenges, we propose So-larTformer, which can accurately capture local semantic information and benefit from the cyclic encoding we per-form as time has cyclical properties. To summarize, the primary contributions of this manuscript are as follows: – We propose a modified transformer [10, 11] based architecture for time series prediction to forecast PV output. – Since the temporal attribute exhibits cyclic pat-terns, the time series data obtained from solar power stations across China are cyclically encoded to ensure efficient model convergence – We integrate metadata from the time series into 

> arXiv:2604.24306v1 [cs.LG] 27 Apr 2026

2the deep neural architecture, addressing limita-tions in existing approaches by capturing intrinsic dataset characteristics while significantly enhanc-ing the prediction performance over pre-existing methods. This improves generalization across un-seen weather conditions as reported in the im-proved accuracy and lower mean prediction error. Our results demonstrate that SolarTformer sur-passes existing literature by a significant margin and achieves a decrease in mean percentage error by almost 60%. The remaining manuscript is structured as follows. A brief overview of recent, relevant published works is pre-sented in Section II. This is followed by a description of the dataset, data preprocessing, and the proposed deep learning model in Section III. Then, Section IV discusses the results and provides a comparison with other works on the same dataset, and relevant ablation studies. Fi-nally, the manuscript ends with ’Conclusions and Future Scope’ in Section V, where we discuss future work and how to improve on certain limitations. We provide pseu-docode for all algorithms used in our work in the Ap-pendix for reproducibility.  

> II. RELATED WORKS

Earlier published works show that research on PV-generated power prediction is sparse, as most literature focus on irradiance patterns forecasting [12]. In pub-lished research literature dealing with prediction of out-put power , temporal data forecasting using statistical methods have been largely used, as they do not re-quire information on the physical aspect of power gen-eration in PV systems, but leverage previous data col-lected from plant sites directly [13]. The most com-monly employed statistical linear approaches are moving average filter models, auto-regressive models, and their derivatives such as the auto-regressive moving-average (ARMA) time series models which has high accuracy on short-term prediction jobs [14, 15]. Linear models, even though simple to implement, has drawbacks for be-ing non-flexible with high-dimensional data, such as ob-tained from photovoltaic plants, which vary according to sporadic weather conditions. Yanting et al. [16] have used a non-linear approach with multivariate adaptive re-gression splines (MARS) to predict daily output power, where the model does not explicitly need any assumption about dependencies between the power output and other variables. These statistical methods, even though largely explain-able and interpretable, fail to predict with accuracy, and introduce large error rates when encountered with inter-mittent changes in PV power generation, as it is suscep-tible to weather change and variations in solar positions over the day [17]. Over the last few decades, several machine learning models have been implemented where, more often than not, manual feature extraction was necessary. Abstract-ing away the simplicity of linear models, artificial neural networks presents a trade-off between complex paradigms and larger computational costs. With the advent of large scale, economically viable GPU clusters, this has not been the case recently, where deep learning architectures such as the Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) [18, 19], Gated Recurrent Units (GRU), Recurrent Neural Net-works (RNN) [20], and the Elman neural networks have been heavily relied on for PV output prediction tasks. Shakhovska et al. [21] have applied machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) techniques to predict so-lar energy generation, highlighting the importance of de-tailed meteorological data. They have collected and pre-processed comprehensive datasets, introduced an hour-based prediction wrapper using sunrise and sunset data to focus on daylight hours, and have proposed a cascaded stacking model to improve generalization and errors mini-mization. Models trained on raw data have outperformed those on stripped data, with an LSTM-Inception model achieving the best results. The study shows that com-bining rich weather data with advanced ML/DL meth-ods can significantly enhance solar energy forecasting. Chaaban et al. [22] have compared various ML mod-els, including the Artificial Neural Network (ANN), the Random Forest, and the LSTM, for predicting PV en-ergy yield using weather forecast data. They found that the Random Forest consistently achieved the best per-formance, with Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) improving further when combined with solar irradiation data. Ferreira et al. [23] have applied ML to predict optical properties of mate-rials for building-integrated photovoltaics (BIPV) using photo-luminescent measurements. Regression and clus-tering models estimated optical and power conversion ef-ficiencies with the MAEs as low as 7%, offering a cost-effective, efficient alternative to traditional material de-sign methods. Ledmaoui et al. [24] compared six ML algorithms (ANN, Support Vector Regression, Decision Tree, Random Forest, Generalized Additive Model and the Extreme Gradient Boosting) for solar energy fore-casting in Morocco. Their findings have revealed ANN to outperform others, with the lowest RMSE and highest R-squared. The study identifies optimal ANN configura-tions, offering practical insights for improving real-world solar energy system optimization. Ganthia et al. [25] pro-posed a smart energy harvesting model (MEHMM), ana-lyzing how reflection varies with the angle of incidence on glass surfaces. Compared to existing models such as the optimized fuzzy logic control (OFLC), fuzzy logic control of stand-alone energy harvesting solar photovoltaic sys-tem (FLCSP), an improved fuzzy logic controller design (IFLCD), and the fuzzy probabilistic-based semi-Markov model (FPSMM), the MEHMM more efficiently sensed and transmitted side light, improving energy capture on non-smooth surfaces. Park et al. [26] used ML models to predict the output of hybrid energy devices (HEDs) that combines photovoltaic cells and thermoelectric gen-3erators. Among the eight models, the ANN best cap-tured the relationship between interface materials and performance, showing a 2.6% power increase (as com-pared to that of a photovoltaic cells alone) with a carbon paste interface at 1000 W/m ². Ramadhan et al. [27] have compared physical and ML models for each step of solar power modeling. The ML models generally outperformed physical models, significantly reducing mean bias differ-ence (MBD) for global irradiance and PV power, with the LSTM and the GRU performing best. However, the physical models were more effective in minimizing root mean square difference. Vatti et al. [28] developed a solar tracking system using micro-controllers and ML to opti-mize panel orientation year-round, following the annual motion of the sun. The proposed system have achieved 93% training and 94% validation accuracy. The study also highlights the importance of phase-changing materi-als (PCMs) for efficient solar thermal energy storage and minimizing energy loss due to reflection. In recent lit-erature multiple hybrid models [29–31] have also been implemented to address several limitations such as over-fitting, gradient vanishing and ever-increasing complexi-ties between the variables associated with historical data available from power plants. Most of the ML and DL based work, in present liter-ature, have focus on PV prediction on similar days (i.e. days having similar weather conditions). This hinders generalizability as it requires, first sorting days based on weather conditions; and then training different model. Our proposed work aims to fill in this gap by creating a generalized model to work across different weather con-ditions year-round. Additionally, imporving geographi-cal and station based generalizabilty have also been at-tempted by incorporating station based metadata.   

> III. METHODOLOGY A. Data Preparation

In this manuscript, meteorological data collected from an actual PV station, along with other necessary in-formation on solar irradiance, wind speed, environmen-tal conditions, and mechanical characteristics (such as panel size, load, etc.) were used. The PV power out-put dataset (PVOD) thus used is taken from a published study [32], and contains PV power output based on nu-merical weather prediction (NWP) as well as local mea-surements data (LMD) for ten PV systems stationed in the Hubei Province of China. The data was collected with 15 minutes resolution. The dataset also contains a metadata file, which describes the characteristics of the PV power stations (see Table I), particularly useful for our approach. The power values were used as the output, and the LMD values from the station dataset (see Table II) were used as input values. This input dataset is referred to as ”weather dataset” in the subsequent portions of this Table I: Metadata description       

> Data Unit ID of stations capacity of the power station kW Material type of PV panel Size of a PV panel m2
> Module information of the PV panel Solar inverters information of the PV system Total number of PV panels laid in for the station Angle of PV panels degree Pyranometers information of the station Longitude of the station degree Latitude of the station degree

Table II: Station Dataset Description                   

> Data Unit date time format YYYY-MM-DD Hour-Min global irradiance of NWP W m −2
> direct irradiance of NWP W m −2
> 10-meter dry-bulb tempera-ture of NWP
> ◦C
> 10-meter relative humidity of NWP %10-meter wind speed of NWP ms −1
> 10-meter wind direction of NWP, zero north clockwise degree atmospheric pressure of NWP hPa global irradiance of LMD W m −2
> diffuse irradiance of LMD W m −2
> temperature of LMD ◦C
> atmospheric pressure of LMD hPa wind direction of LMD degree wind speed of LMD ms −1
> PV output of the station MW

manuscript. From the metadata file, the size and number of panels, the angle of the panels, and the longitude and latitude of the power station were used as inputs. This dataset is referred to as the ”meta dataset” in the remain-ing part of this manuscript. The aim of the present work is to use input data at time instant t min, along with the necessary metadata, in order to forecast the power output at t + 15 min. Cyclic encoding was used to represent the day and time fields. The rationale behind selecting the cyclic encod-ing tool is that weather and climatic conditions reveal the cyclic nature, based on time and day. For example, the ambient temperature (in general) is similar at 23:00, 0:00 and 1:00 hours. Similarly, the climatic conditions are usually similar on the day 365 of a year, and the day 1 and day 2 of the next year. Using linear measurements (like 23:00, 0:00, 1:00 for time and 365, 1, 2 for day) 4

Figure 1: Training Workflow puts disproportionately large differences between similar values. For cyclic encoding, the data points are repre-sented (day or time) as points on the circumference of a circle and, thus, can be represented by the parametric equation of a circle ( cos (θ), sin (θ)) (assuming radius = 1). If a data (of cyclic nature) has, say, x number of data points, each point can be thought to be on the circum-ference separated by an angle of 2πp i 

> x

, where pi is the ith 

data point (assuming the data points are evenly spaced). Thus, the cyclic encoding for the day and time values can be represented as: 

time i cyclic = cos ( 2πtime i

96 ), sin ( 2πtime i

96 ) (1) 

day i cyclic = cos ( 2πday i

365 ), sin ( 2πday i

365 ) (2) In Eq. 1, time i refers to the ith time interval and 

time i cyclic refers to the corresponding cyclic encoding. Data was collected at 15 min interval, which makes a total of 96 times a day when data was collected. This appears as the denominator in Eq. 1. Similarly, in Eq. 2, 

day i refers to the ith day of the year (with 1 st January be-ing day 1 and 31 st December being day 365, for non-leap years) and day i cyclic refers to the corresponding cyclic encoding. The data set contained data measured over the time span 2018-2019 that does not contain any leap year, and thus, it is sufficient to only use 365 as the denomi-nator in Eq. 2. The initial weather dataset was of shape [day-time, weather values]. In this study, it was reshaped into [day, time, weather value]. Similarly, the power out-put dataset was of shape [day-time, power value], and it was reshaped to [day, time, power value]. The power val-ues were normalized by dividing by the number of solar panels in the respective stations. The original meta data set contained a single row corresponding to each PV sta-tion. In this work, it was increased to match the number of rows in the corresponding weather dataset, i.e. one row for each day. Along with this, the cyclic encoding for day was added in the meta dataset. This was done to feed the meta data along with the weather data to our neural network. The datasets of the individual stations were joined (row wise) to create the final dataset. The final dataset, thus, contained 2515 records. The dataset was split into training and testing datasets in a ratio of 9:1. The training dataset was used to do 5-fold cross vali-dation. All the dataset splits were done using Stratified Random Sampling, with the station as the strata, to en-sure that similar statistical parameters are maintained across the different dataset splits. These datasets were normalized using the z-score normalization, as this type of scaling is more robust to outliers. During scaling, it was also ensured that the cyclic encoded values remained unaffected.  

> B. Model Architecture

Our proposed power forecasting model, the ”SolarT-former”, utilizes a hybrid transformer architecture de-signed for time-series prediction, integrating multivariate weather data and static metadata. The input consisted of a weather sequence of 96 time steps, embedded via a ReLU-activated dense layer into a 64-dimensional space, and static metadata projected into the same dimension-ality. A trainable start token S was concatenated with the weather embeddings along the temporal axis. The metadata embedding was tiled across all time steps and concatenated with the weather embeddings, forming the input W. The model enforces temporal dependencies us-ing a causal mask to enforce a fundamental constraint: predictions at any time point depend only on the infor-mation available up to that moment, ensuring temporal causality. Mathematically, the causal mask is defined as follows: 

Mcausal [i, j ] = 

(

0, j ≤ i

−∞ , j > i 

This matrix structure ensures that each element ( i, j )is zero when position j is at or before position i, allowing attention, while it is −∞ if position j is in the future, thereby blocking attention. When applied in the atten-tion mechanism, large negative values translate to near-zero attention weights after softmax, eliminating any con-tribution from future time steps. In the context of power forecasting, this causal con-straint ensures that the power prediction at timestep t,denoted as pt, is computed solely based on past weather data and static metadata, expressed as: 

pt = f (w<t , m )5Power Output                        

> Flatten + Linear Head
> Transformer Encoder
> Layer Normalization + Patching
> ⊕
> Cyclic Encoding
> time
> →(cos 2π time
> 96 ,sin 2π time
> 96
> )
> Cyclic Encoding
> day
> →(cos 2π day
> 365 ,sin 2π day
> 365
> )
> Dense Layer Dense Layer
> Weather Data Meta Data
> x(i)∈R1×L
> xpi∈RP×N
> z(i)∈RD×N
> ˆx(i)∈R1×T

Figure 2: SolarTformer Architecture where f represents the learned mapping of the trans-former, w<t denotes the weather characteristics up to time t (in this case, up to 15 min before time t), and m represents the static metadata. Without this causal masking mechanism, the model could access fu-ture weather data, leading to information leakage and an unrealistic forecast scenario. The mask is integrated within the self-attention mechanism, ensuring strict ad-herence to causality. This can be expressed as: Attention( Q, K, V, M causal )= softmax 

 QK T + Mcausal 

√dk



V (3) where Q, K, and V are the query, key, and value matri-ces derived from weather and metadata embeddings, and 

dk represents the dimension of the key vectors. Our ar-chitecture employs multi-head self-attention layers, each with four attention heads operating in 16-dimensional subspaces. The model was trained using the mean squared er-ror (MSE) loss and AdamW [33] was chosen as the op-timizer with an initial learning rate of 0.01, with per-formance evaluated using Concordance Correlation Co-efficient (CCC), Percentage Error (PE), and Kullback-Leibler Divergence (KLD). 5-fold cross validation was done with 5 different instances of the model to assess the applicability and capacity of the proposed model to learn the probability distribution. All the model instances were trained for 200 epochs each during cross validation. Af-terward, a new instance of the model was trained on the entire training set for 300 epochs and evaluated on the test set. The whole training pipeline is depicted in Fig. 1. 

IV. RESULTS 

The results of the proposed model are presented in Ta-bles III and IV. Table III reports the mean squared er-ror (MSE) values across different cross-validation folds. The relatively consistent values across the folds demon-strate the model’s stability and robustness during train-ing. This consistency indicates that the model gener-alizes well, and does not heavily rely on specific data subsets. However, when trained without regularization, signs of slight overfitting was exhibited by the model, as indicated by the larger discrepancy between the training and the validation errors. To mitigate this, elastic net regulariza-tion was applied with both L1 and L2 coefficients set to 10 −4. This modification has resulted in a reduced gap be-tween the training and the validation errors, suggesting improved generalization performance. 6Table III: Mean squared error across cross-validation folds, with and without regularization                               

> Fold Without Regularization With Regularization
> Training Validation Training Validation 11.0294 1.8963 1.7265 1.7962 21.1304 1.3988 1.5472 1.5824 31.1538 1.4889 1.6177 1.6899 41.1249 2.1716 1.1012 1.2560 51.2706 1.5549 1.5391 1.5814
> Mean 1.1418 1.7021 1.5063 1.5812
> A. Evaluation Metrics

In addition to the MSE, other metrics were used to evaluate the model’s performance on the test dataset, in-cluding the Percentage Error (PE), the Kullback–Leibler (KL) Divergence, and the Lin’s Concordance Correlation Coefficient (CCC). 

Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE): The MAPE is defined as: MAPE = 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

yi − ˆyi

yi

× 100 (4) where yi is the true value, ˆ yi is the predicted value, and 

n is the number of data points. Using the above formula of MAPE was infeasible, as it contained several yi that had a 0 value, resulting in ’divi-sion by zero’ error. Thus, an alternate way of calculating the Percentage Error (PE) has been used, described as follows: PE = 1

n

Pni=1 |yi − ˆyi|

Pni |yi| × 100 (5) This is in line with the error metric used in the published literature [34, 35] on the same dataset. Unlike traditional MAPE, this formulation remains well-behaved even when 

yi → 0 making it better suited to low-irradiance or zero power output conditions. 

KL Divergence: The KL divergence is defined as: 

DKL (P ∥Q) = X

> i

P (i) log P (i)

Q(i) (6) where P (i) and Q(i) are the true and predicted proba-bility distributions, respectively. 

Lin’s Concordance Correlation Coefficient (CCC): The CCC is defined as: 

ρc = 2ρσ xσy

σ2 

> x

+ σ2 

> y

+ ( μx − μy )2 (7) where ρ is the Pearson correlation coefficient between the true and predicted values, σ2 

> x

and σ2 

> y

are the variances, and μx and μy are the means of the true and predicted values, respectively. From Table IV, it can be seen that the proposed model shows very good predictive performance with a low 1.7312% error, 0.0232 KL divergence and high CCC value of 0.9764. Table IV: Test dataset evaluation metrics       

> MSE PE KL Divergence CCC
> 1.6438 1.7312 0.0232 0.9764

The final model was trained for 300 epochs. Till then, the error had plateaued (i.e., there was no appreciable reduction in the loss in sucssive epochs). This can be seen in Figure 3 which shows the variation of the loss function (for both training and validation on the test dataset) against the epoch number. 

Figure 3: Loss curve for the final model training over 300 epochs  

> B. Ablation Study

An ablation study was also conducted to systemati-cally investigate the contribution of various architectural components to the overall performance of the proposed 7model. The analysis focuses on how each modification af-fects the model’s ability to generalize, as measured by the MSE across the training, validation, and test datasets. The results are presented in Table V. As discussed be-fore, the datatset was split into training and testing sets in the ratio 9: 1. For this ablation study, the previous training data set was further split into training and vali-dation sets in the ratio 8:2. Table V: Ablation Study Metrics                                

> Setting Train MSE Validation MSE Test MSE
> Without Normalization 4.772 4.368 4.281 Without Metadata 2.326 2.431 2.395 Without Skip Connections 2.938 2.754 2.646 Without Attention layers 34.746 35.042 30.921
> N= 1 2.212 2.694 2.201
> N= 2 1.145 1.561 1.644
> N= 4 1.604 2.033 1.802
> N= 6 1.825 2.531 1.729

The findings clearly demonstrate the critical role of several key components in achieving high predictive ac-curacy. Removing normalization layers results in a signif-icant degradation in performance, as compared to other settings. This highlights the importance of normaliza-tion in stabilizing training, and ensuring consistent model behavior across different data distributions. Similarly, omitting metadata features also leads to an increase in both validation and test errors. This indicates the im-portance of including metadata in the input for better predictive performance. The removal of skip connections, likewise, adversely impacts performance, indicating that these connections facilitate better gradient flow and information propaga-tion across the network. Models without skip connec-tions exhibit higher errors, confirming their necessity for maintaining a robust learning process. The impact of attention layers is particularly pro-nounced. Without attention mechanisms, the model suf-fers a dramatic increase in error across all datasets, un-derscoring the crucial role played by the attention layers in enabling the model to focus on the most relevant fea-tures and temporal dependencies. Finally, varying the number of network blocks (where each block consists of a transformer encoder, as shown in Fig. 2), denoted by parameter N , reveals certain in-teresting trade-offs. While using N = 1 or N = 2 pro-vides relatively low training errors, the configuration with 

N = 2 achieves the best balance between the validation and the test performance. Increasing N beyond 2, par-ticularly to N = 4 or N = 6, leads to diminishing returns or even slight performance degradation on the test set, which is likely due to the increased model complexity and the potential for overfitting. In summary, the ablation study validates the design choices of the proposed model architecture. Each compo-nent contributes meaningfully to the model’s predictive performance, and careful tuning of the parameters is es-sential for optimizing performance. The insights gained from this analysis offer avenues for future improvements and demonstrate the robustness of the model’s architec-ture. 

C. Comparison with Other Models 

The performance of our proposed model is compared with other baseline methods, in published literature, used on the same dataset, as shown in Table VI. Unlike prior works, which trained separate models for sunny and non-sunny days, our unified model is trained on all types of weather conditions and still performs competitively. Also, in the present work, only one model was trained for data across all the seasons and our model was found to perform well. This can be attributed to the inclu-sion of seasonal information into the meta-data via the cyclic-encoding. Table VI: Comparison of percentage error across models                       

> Model Percentage Error
> SVM [36] 45.00 Generalized Spatio-Temporal Artificial Neural Network (GSTANN) [36, 37] 38.00 CNN (Average sunny + non sunny days)[38] 16.57 BP (Average sunny + non sunny days) [38] 11.62 LSTM (Average sunny + non sunny days)[38] 6.65 Similar Day 1DCNN-LSTM +LightGBM (SD-CL-LGBM) (Average sunny + non sunny days) [38] 5.17 GRU [39] 2.44 LSTM-CNN [39] 2.62 GRU + multi-timescale fluctuation aggregation (MFA) Attention [39] 2.41 LSTM-CNN + MFA Attention [39] 2.63 Similar Day - Backpropagation Neural Network + Ad-aBoost - Grey-Markov (SD-BPA-GM) (Non Sunny) [40] 4.84 SD-BPA-GM (Non Sunny) [40] 8.49 Hybrid Inception-ResNet + Informer (Spring) [41] 8.81 Hybrid Inception-ResNet + Informer (Summer) [41] 8.17 Hybrid Inception-ResNet + Informer (Autumn) [41] 6.95 Hybrid Inception-ResNet + Informer (Winter) [41] 5.80 TinyML [34] 4.51
> SolarTformer 1.73

The strong performance of our proposed model across various weather conditions can be seen in Fig. 4 that depicts the plot of generated power versus time for some data points (days) in the test dataset. From the figure, it can be seen that the predicted power output closely matches the real data across multiple days. The plots with high power output typically correspond to sunny days with strong solar irradiation, while low output in-dicates overcast or less sunny conditions. Moreover, a smooth power curve throughout the day suggests un-interrupted sunlight, whereas fluctuations with multiple peaks and troughs reflect intermittent cloud cover. The plots in Fig. 4 show the close alignment between our model’s predictions and actual outputs under both sta-ble and varying weather conditions. This demonstrates the robustness and generalizability of SolarTformer. 8   

> (a) (b)
> (c) (d)
> (e) (f)

Figure 4: Power predictions across different test samples 9  

> (a) (b)
> (c) (d)

Figure 5: Power predictions across different test samples (continued). 10  

> V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE SCOPE

This work presents a first step in developing an end-to-end framework for time-series forecasting on weather-based datasets, with an aim for reliable prediction of so-lar PV power. Owing to constraints imposed by limited computational resources, the primary focus of this work lies in demonstrating the theoretical foundation and ca-pability of the proposed ”SolarTformer” methodology to address the problem of solar power output prediction. A large-scale study on similar and more diverse datasets is planned as future scope in order to validate and scale our approach further. While ”SolarTformer” has demon-strated strong predictive performance and robustness for short-term photovoltaic power forecasting, several prac-tical and methodological limitations still remain to be ad-dressed. First, hyperparameters pertaining to the model were selected based on informed choices, rather than an exhaustive search, as computational constraints have pre-vented extensive tuning. Although the ablation study included trying out different values of N (number of net-work blocks), other important hyperparameters such as the number of attention heads, embedding dimensions, etc. were not selected by exhaustive search. Future ex-tension of this work is aimed to involve systematic hyper-parameter optimization (e.g., via Bayesian optimization) and additional modifications to refine the architecture. Furthermore, despite leveraging the benefits of self-attention for ensuring temporal learning, the computa-tional and memory demands of the employed architecture pose challenges for deployment on resource-constrained (or edge) devices. Exploring the potentials of lightweight attention approximations, model pruning, quantization, or Monte Carlo dropout would be critical for creation of efficient versions, suitable for embedded systems and ru-ral applications. In addition, attention mechanisms may struggle with extrapolation beyond the observed data, particularly for extreme weather conditions or other un-foreseen natural and/or man-made events. As pointed out, the current evaluation is limited to the dataset from Hubei Province of China spanning over 2018–2019. Val-idating the proposed model on geographically diverse and climatically variant datasets, especially those with unique weather patterns, is essential to assess its gener-alization capabilities. Another challenge lies in the interpretability of transformer-based models. While attention weights offer a certain degree of insight into feature relevance, a deeper understanding of how specific meteorological inputs drive (power output) predictions requires advanced explain-ability methods (e.g., SHAP, integrated gradients). Fi-nally, the current model focuses on a 15-minute short-term forecast horizon. Extending the present model to support multi-horizon forecasts (e.g. hourly, daily) and integrating it with real-time grid management systems would greatly broaden its practical applicability. Ad-dressing these challenges will enhance both the theoreti-cal underpinnings and the real-world deployment poten-tial of the proposed model as a comprehensive time-series forecasting solution for renewable energy systems.  

> VI. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

AB : Conceptualization; Data curation; Formal anal-ysis; Investigation; Methodology; Validation; Writing-original draft; Writing-review & editing. JR : Investiga-tion; Methodology; Visualization; Writing-original draft. 

AD : Investigation; Methodology; Visualization; Writing-original draft. PS : Conceptualization; Formal anal-ysis; Visualization; Validation; Writing-original draft; Writing-review & editing. SB : Project administration; Supervision; Validation; Writing-review & editing.                              

> [1] S.-C. Lim, J.-H. Huh, S.-H. Hong, C.-Y. Park, and J.-C. Kim, Solar power forecasting using cnn-lstm hybrid model, Energies 15 , 10.3390/en15218233 (2022). [2] J. Antonanzas, N. Osorio, R. Escobar, R. Urraca, F. M. de Pison, and F. Antonanzas-Torres, Review of photo-voltaic power forecasting, Solar Energy 136 , 78 (2016). [3] A. S. B. Mohd Shah, H. Yokoyama, and N. Kakimoto, High-precision forecasting model of solar irradiance based on grid point value data analysis for an efficient photo-voltaic system, IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy
> 6, 474 (2015). [4] A. Goetzberger, C. Hebling, and H.-W. Schock, Photo-voltaic materials, history, status and outlook, Materials Science and Engineering: R: Reports 40 , 1 (2003). [5] X. G. Agoua, R. Girard, and G. Kariniotakis, Short-Term Spatio-Temporal Forecasting of Photovoltaic Power Pro-duction, IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy 9,538 (2018). [6] U. K. Das, K. S. Tey, M. Y. I. B. Idris, S. Mekhilef, M. Seyedmahmoudian, A. Stojcevski, and B. Horan, Op-timized support vector regression-based model for so-lar power generation forecasting on the basis of online weather reports, IEEE Access 10 , 15594 (2022). [7] N. Sanewal and V. Khanna, Solar power prediction in north india using different regression models, in 2023 IEEE World Conference on Applied Intelligence and Computing (AIC) (2023) pp. 364–369. [8] G. O. Micha and C.-H. Kim, An intelligent photovoltaic power forecasting model based on bagged-boosted stack support vector regression with kernel linear, The Trans-actions of The Korean Institute of Electrical Engineers
> 70 , 1633 (2021). [9] F. Dama and C. Sinoquet, Time series analysis and modeling to forecast: a survey (2021), arXiv:2104.00164 [cs.LG]. [10] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin,

11 

Attention is all you need, in Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , Vol. 30, edited by I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vish-wanathan, and R. Garnett (Curran Associates, Inc., 2017). [11] Y. Nie, N. H. Nguyen, P. Sinthong, and J. Kalagnanam, A time series is worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers, in International Conference on Learn-ing Representations (2023). [12] H. Sharadga, S. Hajimirza, and R. S. Balog, Time se-ries forecasting of solar power generation for large-scale photovoltaic plants, Renewable Energy 150 , 797 (2020). [13] Y. Xia, J. Wang, Z. Zhang, D. Wei, and L. Yin, Short-term pv power forecasting based on time series expansion and high-order fuzzy cognitive maps, Applied Soft Com-puting 135 , 110037 (2023). [14] J. Feng and S. X. Xu, Integrated technical paradigm based novel approach towards photovoltaic power gen-eration technology, Energy Strategy Reviews 34 , 100613 (2021). [15] E. Erdem and J. Shi, Arma based approaches for fore-casting the tuple of wind speed and direction, Applied Energy 88 , 1405 (2011). [16] Y. Li, Y. He, Y. Su, and L. Shu, Forecasting the daily power output of a grid-connected photovoltaic system based on multivariate adaptive regression splines, Ap-plied Energy 180 , 392 (2016). [17] X. Xiang, X. Li, Y. Zhang, and J. Hu, A short-term fore-casting method for photovoltaic power generation based on the tcn-ecanet-gru hybrid model, Scientific Reports 

14 , 6744 (2024). [18] M. S. Hossain and H. Mahmood, Short-term photovoltaic power forecasting using an lstm neural network and syn-thetic weather forecast, IEEE Access 8, 172524 (2020). [19] Y. Tang, F. Yu, W. Pedrycz, X. Yang, J. Wang, and S. Liu, Building trend fuzzy granulation-based lstm re-current neural network for long-term time-series fore-casting, IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems 30 , 1599 (2022). [20] K. Stankeviciute, A. M. Alaa, and M. van der Schaar, Conformal time-series forecasting, in Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , Vol. 34, edited by M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. W. Vaughan (Curran Associates, Inc., 2021) pp. 6216– 6228. [21] N. Shakhovska, M. Medykovskyi, O. Gurbych, M. Mam-chur, and M. Melnyk, Enhancing solar energy produc-tion forecasting using advanced machine learning and deep learning techniques: A comprehensive study on the impact of meteorological data, Computers, Materials & Continua 81 , 3147 (2024). [22] A. K. Chaaban and N. Alfadl, A comparative study of machine learning approaches for an accurate predictive modeling of solar energy generation, Energy Reports 12 ,1293 (2024). [23] R. A. S. Ferreira, S. F. H. Correia, L. Fu, P. Georgieva, M. Antunes, and P. S. Andr´ e, Predicting the efficiency of luminescent solar concentrators for solar energy harvest-ing using machine learning, Scientific Reports 14 , 4160 (2024). [24] Y. Ledmaoui, A. El Maghraoui, M. El Aroussi, R. Saadane, A. Chebak, and A. Chehri, Forecasting so-lar energy production: A comparative study of machine learning algorithms, Energy Reports 10 , 1004 (2023). [25] B. P. Ganthia, S. Hanumanthakari, H. Gudimindla, H. Anandaram, M. S. Ramkumar, M. Mohanty, S. R. Gopal, A. Sarojwal, and K. M. Hadish, Machine learn-ing strategy to achieve maximum energy harvesting and monitoring method for solar photovoltaic panel ap-plications, International Journal of Photoenergy 2022 ,4493116 (2022). [26] Y. Park, K. Cho, and S. Kim, Performance prediction of hybrid energy harvesting devices using machine learning, ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 14 , 11248 (2022). [27] R. A. Ramadhan, Y. R. Heatubun, S. F. Tan, and H.-J. Lee, Comparison of physical and machine learning models for estimating solar irradiance and photovoltaic power, Renewable Energy 178 , 1006 (2021). [28] R. Vatti, N. Vatti, K. Mahender, P. Lakshmi Vatti, and B. Krishnaveni, Solar energy harvesting for smart farm-ing using nanomaterial and machine learning, IOP Con-ference Series: Materials Science and Engineering 981 ,032009 (2020). [29] N. M. Sabri and M. E. Hassouni, Accurate photo-voltaic power prediction models based on deep convolu-tional neural networks and gated recurrent units, Energy Sources, Part A: Recovery, Utilization, and Environmen-tal Effects 44 , 6303 (2022). [30] K. Wang, X. Qi, and H. Liu, Photovoltaic power fore-casting based lstm-convolutional network, Energy 189 ,116225 (2019). [31] A. Agga, A. Abbou, M. Labbadi, and Y. El Houm, Short-term self consumption pv plant power production fore-casts based on hybrid cnn-lstm, convlstm models, Re-newable Energy 177 , 101 (2021). [32] T. Yao, J. Wang, H. Wu, P. Zhang, S. Li, Y. Wang, X. Chi, and M. Shi, A photovoltaic power output dataset: Multi-source photovoltaic power output dataset with python toolkit, Solar Energy 230 , 122 (2021). [33] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, Decoupled weight decay regularization, in International Conference on Learning Representations (2019). [34] N. El-Amarty, H. E. Fadili, and S. D. Bennani, Accu-rate short-term solar irradiance forecasting with tinyml on edge device, in 2024 International Conference on Cir-cuit, Systems and Communication (ICCSC) (2024) pp. 1–6. [35] Y. Liu, S. Duan, X. He, and H. Wang, Short-term pv power prediction based on the 24 traditional chinese solar terms and adaboost-ga-bp model, Frontiers in Energy Re-search Volume 11 - 2023 , 10.3389/fenrg.2023.1229695 (2023). [36] M. F. F. M. Helmy, S. H. B. Yusoff, H. Mansor, T. S. Gu-nawan, I. J. Chowdhury, and S. N. M. Sapihie, A com-parative analysis of lstm, svm, and gstann models for enhancing solar power prediction, in 2024 IEEE 10th In-ternational Conference on Smart Instrumentation, Mea-surement and Applications (ICSIMA) (2024) pp. 48–53. [37] T. Yao, J. Wang, Y. Wang, P. Zhang, H. Cao, X. Chi, and M. Shi, Very short-term forecasting of distributed pv power using gstann, CSEE Journal of Power and Energy Systems 10 , 1491 (2024). [38] Y. Peng, S. Wang, W. Chen, J. Ma, C. Wang, and J. Chen, Lightgbm-integrated pv power predic-tion based on multi-resolution similarity, Processes 11 ,10.3390/pr11041141 (2023). [39] L. Yuan, X. Wang, Y. Sun, X. Liu, and Z. Y. Dong, Multistep photovoltaic power forecasting based on multi-12 

timescale fluctuation aggregation attention mechanism and contrastive learning, International Journal of Elec-trical Power & Energy Systems 164 , 110389 (2025). [40] X. Yang, S. Wang, Y. Peng, J. Chen, and L. Meng, Short-term photovoltaic power prediction with similar-day inte-grated by bp-adaboost based on the grey-markov model, Electric Power Systems Research 215 , 108966 (2023). [41] D. Peng, Y. Liu, D. Wang, L. Luo, H. Zhao, and B. Qu, Short-term pv-wind forecasting of large-scale regional site clusters based on fcm clustering and hybrid inception-resnet embedded with informer, Energy Conversion and Management 320 , 118992 (2024). 13 

Appendix A: Supplementary Information 1. Data Preparation and Splitting 

Algorithm 1: Data Preparation for SolarTformer 

Input: Station set S; for each s ∈ S: weather table Ws (LMD at 15-min), power table Ps, metadata row Ms

Output: Dataset D = {(Xi ∈ RT ×Dw , m i ∈ RDm , y i ∈ RT , id i)}Ni=1 , with T =96 

D ← ∅ ;

for each station s ∈ S do 

Parse date time into day-of-year d ∈ { 1, . . . , 365 } and time-slot τ ∈ { 0, . . . , 95 };Reshape weather: Xs[d, τ, :] ∈ RT ×Dw from Ws (one row per day); Reshape power: Ys[d, τ ] ∈ RT from Ps (one row per day); Per-panel normalization: Ys ← Ys/num panels (Ms); Cyclic time features for each τ : tcos (τ )= cos(2 πτ / 96), tsin (τ )= sin(2 πτ / 96); Cyclic day features for each d: dcos (d)= cos(2 π(d−1) /365), dsin (d)= sin(2 π(d−1) /365); Expand metadata to daily rows and append day encoding:; 

ms[d]:=concat  dcos (d), d sin (d), Ms

 ∈ RDm ;

for each day d present in Xs, Y s do 

Augment weather time-axis with time encodings:; 

X⋆s [d, τ, :] ← concat  tcos (τ ), t sin (τ ), X s[d, τ, :] ;Append sample to D:; 

D ← D ∪ { (Xi:= X⋆s [d, :, :] , m i:= ms[d], y i:= Ys[d, :] , id i:= s)};Stratified split by station ID: Dtrain , Dtest with ratio 9:1; Fit z-score scaler ϕ on Dtrain weather dimensions only, excluding cyclic features ( tcos , t sin , d cos , d sin ); Apply ϕ to weather features of both Dtrain and Dtest ; leave cyclic features unchanged; From Dtrain , create 5 stratified folds by station ID: {(Dtr  

> k

, Dval  

> k

)}5

> k=1

;

2. SolarTformer Forward Pass (Causal) 

Algorithm 2: SolarTformer Forward Pass with Causal Mask 

Input: Weather X ∈ RT ×Dw with time encodings, metadata m ∈ RDm , T =96; model dims d=64, heads h=4, blocks N

Output: Next-step predictions ˆ y1: T

Weather embedding: Ew ← ReLU( XW w + bw) ∈ RT ×d;Metadata embedding: em ← ReLU( mW m + bm) ∈ Rd;Trainable start token: s ∈ Rd;Prepend start: Z ← concat([ s], E w) ∈ R(T +1) ×d;Tile metadata across time: M ← tile( em, T +1) ∈ R(T +1) ×d;Fuse modalities: H ← ReLU([ Z ∥ M ]Wf + bf ) ∈ R(T +1) ×d;Define causal mask Mcausal ∈ R(T +1) ×(T +1) : Mcausal [i, j ]=0 if j≤i, else −∞ ;

for ℓ=1 to N do 

U ← LayerNorm( H); 

U ← U + MHA( Q=U, K =U, V =U, M causal , h ); 

V ← LayerNorm( U ); 

H ← U + FFN( V ) ; // two dense layers with ReLU, residual connections 

Drop start token position: Hout ← H[2: T +1 , :] ∈ RT ×d;Readout: ˆ y1: T ← Hout Wo + bo ∈ RT ;

Training shift: predict yt using {X<t , m } via the start-token shift.; 14 

3. Training and Cross-Validation 

Algorithm 3: Cross-Validation Training with Elastic Net 

Input: Folds {(Dtr  

> k

, Dval  

> k

)}5

> k=1

, epochs Ecv =300, optimizer AdamW with lr = 0 .01 

Input: Loss MSE; optional elastic net: L1 λ1=10 −4, L2 λ2=10 −4

Output: Fold-wise train/val MSE and their means 

for k=1 to 5 do 

Initialize SolarTformer parameters θ;

for epoch = 1 to Ecv do for each minibatch (X, m, y ) ∈ Dtr  

> k

do 

ˆy ← Forward( X, m ; θ) using Alg. 2; 

LMSE ← 1

> |y|

P(y−ˆy)2;

L ← LMSE + λ1∥θ∥1 + λ2∥θ∥22;Update θ via AdamW step on ∇θ L;Record train MSE; compute validation MSE on Dval  

> k

;Store fold-k train/val MSE; Report mean train/val MSE across folds, with and without regularization; 

4. Final Training, Test Time Evaluation, and Ablation Studies 

Algorithm 4: Final Model Training and Metric Computation 

Input: Full training set Dtrain , test set Dtest , epochs Efinal =300, AdamW (lr = 0 .01) 

Output: Test metrics: MSE, PE, KL Divergence, CCC Initialize new SolarTformer θ;

for epoch = 1 to Efinal do for each minibatch (X, m, y ) ∈ Dtrain do 

ˆy ← Forward( X, m ; θ); Minimize MSE (and optional elastic net); Update θ via AdamW; Evaluate on Dtest : collect {(y(i), ˆy(i))}ni=1 across all sequences (length T ); Compute:; MSE ← 1

> nT

P

> i,t

 y(i) 

> t

−ˆy(i)

> t

2;PE ←    

> P
> i,t |y(i)
> t−ˆy(i)
> t|
> P
> i,t |y(i)
> t|

× 100; Estimate empirical distributions P, Q via histogram with B bins on {y} and {ˆy}; apply smoothing ϵ;

DKL (P ∥Q) ← PBb=1 Pb log Pb 

> Qb+ϵ

;Let x ← y (true) and z ← ˆy (pred); compute means μx, μ z , stds σx, σ z , Pearson ρ;CCC ← 2ρ σ xσz   

> σ2
> x+σ2
> z+( μx−μz)2

;

Algorithm 5: Ablation Protocol and Evaluation 

Input: Base pipeline (Alg. 1–4); ablations: (i) No normalization; (ii) No metadata; (iii) No skip connections; (iv) No attention layers; (v) N =1 , 2, 4, 6 transformer blocks 

Output: Train/Validation/Test MSE for each setting Use the same 9:1 train:test split as main experiments; For ablation validation, further split prior training set into train:val = 8:2; 

for each ablation setting do 

Modify model or preprocessing accordingly; Train for Ecv epochs on the ablation train split; validate on ablation val split; Evaluate final model on test split; record Train/Val/Test MSE; Report all ablation metrics in tabular form (cf. Table V);