Title: Graph-Based Modeling, Control, and Optimization for Multi-Domain and Multi-Timescale Energy Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.27017v1

Published Time: Wed, 27 May 2026 01:39:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# Graph-Based Modeling, Control, and Optimization for Multi-Domain and Multi-Timescale Energy Systems 

Joseph M. Pisani, Christopher T. Aksland, Philip M. Renkert, Joseph Broniszewski, Vismay Vyas, Andrew G. Alleyne, Donald J. Docimo, Justin P. Koeln, Neera Jain, and Herschel C. Pangborn 

Abstract — Modern energy systems in vehicles and built infrastructure are governed by high-dimensional dynamics spanning multiple physical domains (e.g., electrical, thermal, mechanical) and timescales. This tutorial paper presents agraph-based modeling approach created to facilitate the mod-eling, analysis, control, estimation, optimization, and design of these systems. Matured and validated through more than a decade of research spanning multiple academic institutions and companies, the graph-based approach combines transient energy conservation with an explicit mathematical representa-tion of the network by which energy is stored and transferred within a system. Following a mathematical overview of graph-based models, examples of multi-domain component and system models from the recent literature are presented, including single-phase thermal systems, two-phase thermal systems, and electro-mechanical systems. This is followed by a survey of recent applications for decentralized and hierarchical model predictive control, design optimization, and control co-design. Lastly, the paper describes an open-source toolbox created to facilitate the generation and analysis of graph-based models. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

There is continual demand for energy systems in vehicles and built infrastructure to achieve greater performance, en-ergy/power density, efficiency, sustainability, and resilience. This drives engineers towards systems with greater com-plexity, connectivity, and integration, in turn creating new opportunities and challenges in design, optimization, and control. The aviation field exemplifies this trend, where an exponential increase in electrical power on board advanced aircraft has contributed to a potential “thermal management nightmare” [1], inspiring calls to supplement conventional steady-state design processes with new methods that can exploit transients, as well as replace classical control ar-chitectures with more advanced frameworks [2]. Similar calls can be found for virtually all transportation modalities,  

> Joseph M. Pisani and Herschel C. Pangborn are with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802 USA (e-mail:

hcpangborn@psu.edu ). Christopher T. Aksland is with PC Krause & Associates. Philip M. Renkert is with the University of Dayton Research Institute. Joseph Broniszewski, Vismay Viyas, and Neera Jain are with the School of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue University. Andrew G. Alleyne is with the College of Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota. Donald J. Docimo is with the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Texas Tech University. Justin P. Koeln is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Texas at Dallas. This work was supported by the Office of Naval Research under Award N000142512051. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommen-dations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Office of Naval Research. 

including but not limited to automobiles, trains, and naval ships [3]. The built environment is undergoing comparable trends [4], spanning electrical power generation, storage, and distribution, as well as heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC). These applications often involve coupling across multiple physical domains. For example, electrified vehicle power-trains are necessarily electro-mechanical. Furthermore, elec-trical devices exhibit temperature-dependent reliability and must often be paired with thermal management systems. In turn, many thermal management systems are driven by electrical actuators and governed by thermal-fluid dynamics of single-phase or two-phase flows. Largely because of their multi-domain nature, the dynamics of these energy systems evolve across a wide range of timescales. For example, the temperatures of a large thermal energy storage module in a building might evolve over hours, while the voltages and cur-rents of an electrical device can evolve over sub-millisecond timescales. This inherently leads to stiff dynamics. Technological innovations can be facilitated by access to dynamic models that are amenable to rapid simulation, symbolic analysis, scalable design optimization, and real-time model-based control. While data-based methods like machine learning offer many capabilities, there remain con-texts in which physics-based models can offer greater insight and reliability by providing a first-principles, parametric representation of key optimization and control parameters, including physical properties, design parameters, and control inputs. 

A. Literature Review 

A variety of established methods and tools exist for modeling complex energy systems. Prominent examples in-clude Bond Graphs [5] and Port-Hamiltonian Systems [6]. These methods offer distinct advantages, such as the explicit enforcement of causality in Bond Graphs. The Modelica lan-guage [7], used in tools such as OpenModelica or Dymola, is an object-oriented modeling language designed for dynamic modeling of physical systems that then leverages a compiler for model simulation; many component libraries specifically for energy systems have been developed for academic and commercial use. Other commercial tools for modeling energy systems include Simscape, designed by MathWorks, that enables multi-domain modeling with MATLAB/Simulink integration [8]. A primary focus of these modeling frameworks is fidelity: faithfully reproducing the system’s physical behavior in a 

> arXiv:2605.27017v1 [eess.SY] 26 May 2026

TABLE I: Summary of graph-based model energy domains.     

> Domain References
> Electrical [10]–[26] Mechanical [10]–[13], [16], [17], [19]–[25], [27], [28] Thermal [9]–[25], [27]–[51]

simulation. However, to achieve the aforementioned tech-nological innovations in energy systems requires models amenable to symbolic analysis, scalable design optimization, and real-time model-based control. An approach that offers this is graph-based modeling, or the expression of the system model as a network graph, composed of vertices and edges, that encodes the structure of energy conservation within a system. The first key benefit is deep system analysis. The compact graphical representation given by the network structure of a graph is not merely a schematic; it is a formal mathematical object . This structure allows the rich toolkit of graph theory to be directly applied to analyze the model’s internal interconnections. This enables power-ful model decomposition techniques unavailable in many other frameworks. For example, large-scale models can be systematically partitioned into smaller, more manageable clusters using spectral graph tools to identify and separate components based on timescale interactions, or by using cut-set analysis to cluster subsystems based on the strength of their interactions. This decomposition is a powerful analytical tool, as it can algorithmically highlight specific topological features or hidden structures within the model. These revealed structures can then be directly capitalized upon by advanced controller designs, as demonstrated by the hierarchical control architectures later in this paper. This analytical capability leads directly to the second ma-jor benefit: Inherent modularity and composability. The abil-ity to decompose a system also implies the ability to compose one. Individual subsystems or components can be created, modeled, and validated in isolation. This “re-composability” is a key enabler for system design and optimization, creating a “plug-and-play” environment where subsystems can be easily interchanged to study various design tradeoffs and system configurations can be tested in a rapid, automated fashion. This flexibility, which allows design optimization to be performed concurrently with controller design, is far more streamlined in the graph-based setting than in monolithic modeling approaches. The graph-based modeling approach described in this tuto-rial paper was first proposed in [9] for modeling single-phase fluid-thermal systems. Since 2016, it has been extended to a host of other components, subsystems, and systems, spanning two-phase refrigeration cycles, electro-mechanical power-trains, and turbomachinery. Table I summarizes the current graph-based modeling literature categorized by energy do-mains. As prior works include both single- and multi-domain energy systems, some studies appear in multiple rows. Table II summarizes the applications of graph-based modeling for design, optimization, control, and system analysis. TABLE II: Applications of graph-based modeling.        

> Application References
> Architecture Optimization [10], [24], [30], [31], [43] Control Co-Design [11], [14], [15], [23], [31], [33] Design Optimization [10], [22], [24], [31], [46], [50] Estimation and/or Fault Detection [26], [45], [47]–[49], [51]–[53] Model-Based Control [17]–[21], [25], [35], [38], [40], [54]–[57] System Analysis [17], [33], [34]

B. Contribution and Outline 

In this tutorial paper, more than a decade of research on graph-based modeling for multi-domain energy systems is synthesized for the reader, beginning with a summary of the underlying mathematical description (Section II) in both its original form and an extension to simultaneously encode multiple coupled energy conservation equations. This is followed by examples of how graph-based modeling can be applied to represent single-phase and two-phase thermal-fluid components as well as electro-mechanical components (Section III) and applications of the modeling approach for control analysis and design, control co-design, and design op-timization (Section IV). The paper also includes an overview of a new MATLAB-based toolbox developed to facilitate the creation and analysis of graph-based models (Section V). Lastly, Section VI provides concluding remarks, discusses potential future directions, and identifies open problems. II. M ATHEMATICAL DESCRIPTION 

This section first describes the original framework for graph-based modeling, applicable to a wide variety of me-chanical, electrical, and single-phase thermal-fluid compo-nents. For clarity of exposition, this is written under the assumption that the graph represents conservation of energy; however, as shown in Section III-A, the same general ap-proach can be applied to represent conservation of mass. We then present an extension of the framework to simultaneously encode multiple coupled conservation equations, which later facilitates modeling of two-phase thermal systems in Sec-tion III-B. Lastly, we discuss how graph-based models of components can be connected to assemble system models. Unless otherwise stated, vectors and matrices are denoted by boldface letters, and sets by calligraphic letters. 

A. Original Framework 

Fig. 1 illustrates a notional example of a graph-based model, represented as an oriented graph composed of vertices and edges. Vertices denote energy storage elements of the system while edges describe the energy transfer rates (re-ferred to here as power flows) between interconnected energy storage elements. To define a graph-based model, let V be the set of vertices with cardinality NV and E be the set of edges with cardinality NE . Each edge ej ∈ E has an orientation from its tail vertex to its head vertex, establishing the sign convention for positive power flow. In general, energy can be transferred in either direction along an edge, depending on the orientation of the edge and the sign of the associated Fig. 1: Notional example of a graph-based model. power flow. The set of edges oriented out from vertex vi

is denoted as Etail  

> i

and the set of edges oriented into vi is denoted as Ehead  

> i

.Vertices are classified into two categories: dynamic and ex-ternal. Dynamic vertices are associated with dynamic energy storage states and are indicated by the vertex set Vd ⊂ V with cardinality NVd . Each vertex in Vd therefore corresponds to a dynamic state xi(t). External vertices are associated with exogenous sources or sinks of power flow to the system, and are indicated by the vertex set Vs ⊂ V with cardinality NVs .Each vertex in Vs therefore corresponds to a time-varying disturbance to the system xsi (t). Each edge corresponds to a power flow Pj (t). By conservation of energy, the differential equation corresponding to each dynamic state is given by 

Ci ˙xi(t) = ∑    

> {j:ej∈E head
> i}

Pj (t) − ∑    

> {j:ej∈E tail
> i}

Pj (t) , (1) where Ci is the energy storage capacitance corresponding to state xi.Each power flow is calculated as a function of the head and tail states of its corresponding edge, as well as a control input uj (t). In general, this can be expressed as a nonlinear function 

Pj (t) = fj

(xtail  

> j

(t), x head  

> j

(t), u j (t)) . (2) The graph structure is described by incidence matrix M ∈

RNV ×NE with 

[mi,j ] = 



1, if vi ∈ V is the tail of ej ∈ E ,

−1, if vi ∈ V is the head of ej ∈ E ,

0, otherwise .

(3) The incidence matrix can be partitioned according to dy-namic and sink vertices as 

M =

[ MM

]

, (4) where M ∈ RNVd ×NE and M ∈ RNVs ×NE . It is assumed that the vertices are ordered such that rows of M correspond to dynamic states and rows of M correspond to sink states. A graph structure can be completely characterized by its vertices, edges, and incidence matrix as G = ( V, E, M ).Based on the above notation, the system dynamics of a graph-based model are expressed as 

C ˙x(t) = −M P (t) , (5) where C is a diagonal matrix of the dynamic state capaci-tances, x is the vector of dynamic states, and P is the vector of power flows. In some cases, it is convenient to also include external edges representing exogenous power flows to or from the system. Equation (5) then becomes 

C ˙x(t) = −M P (t) + DP in (t) , (6) where P in is the vector of external power flows and 

D captures the connectivity of external edges to dynamic vertices, similar to M .In the remainder of the paper, we omit the dependence of states, power flows, and inputs on time except as necessary for clarity of exposition. 

B. Extension for Multi-State Vertices 

As outlined above, graph-based models describe the sys-tem dynamics via conservation of energy. While energy conservation laws are practical for a wide range of energy system applications, models of systems with two-phase flow also require mass conservation. Additional state variables can be added to vertices of the graph to capture this. Russel et al. [37] present a graph-based model with multi-state vertices, where pressure and enthalpy are chosen as the two dynamic states to describe a two-phase fluid system. The structure from (6) is extended to encompass the multi-state framework, taking the form 

C′ ˙x = −(M ∗ SM )P (x, u) + ( D ∗ SD )P in , (7) where the reader is referred to [37] for the derivation and definition of terms. Bolander et al. [27] present an extension to [37] using a combined multi-flow vector Γ. The adaptive matrix S is used to map the multi-flow edges to the multi-state vertices in the graph model, where S is defined via the piece-wise expression 

[sm,n ]i,j =



1, if (C ˙x)i,m = f (Pj,n )

or if (C ˙x)i,m = f (Ps,j,n ) ,

0, otherwise ,

(8) where m is the state variable number of a given vertex i, n

is the flow edge type, and i and j correspond to vertices and edges of the incidence matrix, respectively. A modified capacitance matrix C′ extends the diagonal capacitance matrix C into a block diagonal capacitance matrix C′, where block diagonal entries correspond to each vertex. A Khatri-Rao product ∗ between the incidence matrix 

M and adaptive S matrix results in 

C′ ˙x = −(M ∗ S)Γ . (9) 

C. Connecting Graph-Based Models 

Modeling complex and high-dimensional systems as graphs is often easiest by first building graph-based models of individual components and then connecting their vertices and edges. External vertices and edges denote a component’s Fig. 2: Visualization of vertex (top) and edge (bottom) connections, modified from [16], where xi,j is the i-th state of component j.interaction with other components or the environment and are required to connect two (or more) components together. There are two ways to connect graph-based models: Vertex and edge connections, referred to as Type 1 and Type 2 connections, respectively, in [16]. Vertex connections are used when components have equivalent dynamic or external states, such as two electrical components in series that share the same current state or two components in parallel that share the same voltage state. The top of Fig. 2 shows how three simple graph-based models can be connected along a vertex. Note that a vertex connection can contain at most one dynamic vertex. When power is exchanged between two components, an edge connection is used. For example, the electrical power leaving a motor drive is equivalent to the power entering a connected electrical motor. A simple example is shown on the bottom of Fig. 2. III. M ODEL EXAMPLES 

With the mathematical framework of graph-based models now established, we next summarize how component- and subsystem-level models in several key physical domains can be derived via application of conservation of energy and mass. The toolbox described in Section V allows component or subsystem models to be coded once , stored in a “library,” and then easily instantiated, parametrized, and interconnected as desired by the user. The existing toolbox library includes many models that been derived in the literature. While the discussion in this section is organized by phys-ical domain, a key feature of graph-based modeling is the ability to interconnect component models spanning different domains to represent complex multi-domain systems. As an example, Fig. 3 from [11] shows a candidate architecture for propulsion, power, and thermal management systems of a hybrid-electric aircraft (top) and the corresponding graph-based model structure (bottom), formed by coupling individual graph-based models for each key component and subsystem. This uses a simplified representation for electrical components in terms of average power, whereas Section III-C presents a higher-fidelity approach that captures voltage and current transients. Fig. 4 shows a second example from [21] 

Fig. 3: Schematic (top) and corresponding graph-based model structure (bottom) for a hybrid-electric aircraft propul-sion, power, and thermal management system [11]. for an uncrewed aerial vehicle (UAV) powertrain and thermal management system that uses these higher-fidelity electrical component representations. 

A. Single-Phase Thermal and Fluid Systems 

The reader is referred to [9] for a detailed derivation of graph-based models for single-phase thermal components. For these components, conservation of thermal energy is applied within the graph-based framework to yield vertex states representing temperatures of lumped thermal control volumes T and edge power flows representing heat transfer between control volumes. The control inputs to the model are typically fluid mass flow rates ˙m.For all single-phase thermal vertices, the capacitance is given by C = M c p, where M is the control volume mass and 

cp is the specific heat capacitance of the control volume fluid or material, which can either be assumed constant or modeled as a function of temperature. For advective heat transfer due to fluid flow, the power flow equation (2) specifies to 

P = ˙ mc pT tail , (10) where we assume that fluid flows in the same direction as the orientation of the edge. That is, the rate of advective heat transfer is equal to product of the mass flow rate input, specific heat capacitance, and upstream temperature state. For convective heat transfer in heat exchangers, the power flow is 

P = hA s(T tail − T head ) , (11) where As is the convective surface area and h is the heat transfer coefficient, which can either be assumed constant or modeled as a function of the head temperature, tail temperature, and fluid mass flow rate. While in many cases it is sufficient to treat the pressure dynamics of single-phase systems as operating at pseudo-steady state relative to the timescale of the thermal dynamics, Fig. 4: Schematic (top) and corresponding graph-based model structure (bottom) for a UAV powertrain and thermal management system [21]. it is also possible to apply conservation of mass in the graph-based framework to capture pressure dynamics. In this case, vertex states represent the pressures of lumped control volumes p and edges represent mass flow rates between control volumes. The inputs to the model are typically actuator states such as the rotational speed of centrifugal pumps or percentage opening of a valve orifice. For all pressure vertices except those of a reservoir, the hydraulic capacitance is given by C = M/E , where E is the bulk modulus of the fluid. For reservoirs, C = Ac/g ,where Ac is the reservoir cross sectional area and g is the gravitational constant. For most hydraulic edges (e.g., in cold plates and heat exchangers), the edge equation specifies to 

˙m = ρA c

√

2( ptail − phead + ρg ∆h)

ρ(f LD + KL) , (12) where P tail and P head are the upstream and downstream pressure states, respectively, L, D, and Ac are the fluid flow length, diameter, and cross sectional area, respectively, ∆h

is the height difference between the inlet and outlet flow, f

is the friction factor, and KL is the minor loss coefficient. 

Fig. 5: Example graph-based model for a cold plate with single-phase flow. For centrifugal pumps, the mass flow rate is given by 

˙m = ρA c

√

2g

(

H − phead − ptail 

ρg 

)

, (13) where the pump head H is determined using an empirical map, typically as a function of pump rotational speed ω and the pressure difference across the pump. This again assumes that fluid flows in the same direction as the orientation of the edge. As a representative example, Fig. 5 illustrates the thermal graph-based model of a single-phase cold plate heat ex-changer assuming that pressure dynamics operate at pseudo-steady state, where subscripts in , f , and w denote the upstream fluid, lumped fluid in the cold plate, and lumped cold plate wall, respectively, and Pw is the heat transfer into the wall from a device cooled by the cold plate. When both temperature and pressure dynamics of single-phase components are to be simulated together, the fluid mass flow rates computed as edge properties of the pressure graph can be communicated as edge inputs to the thermal graph. In turn, fluid properties of the pressure graph can be calculated as a function of the temperature states of the thermal graph. In this way, the two graphs are bidirectionally coupled but can be solved in parallel at each numerical integration time step and without any algebraic loops. That is not the case for two-phase systems, as alluded to in Section II-B and described in further detail next. 

B. Two-Phase Thermal and Fluid Systems 

In two-phase fluid systems, single-state vertices are insuf-ficient to determine thermodynamic states due to the strong thermodynamic coupling between pressure p and enthalpy h

in the two-phase region. The reader is referred to [37] for a detailed derivation of a graph-based model for a two-phase thermal component. Here we summarize the derivation of a multi-state heat exchanger model. Applying conservation of mass and energy to a two-phase heat exchanger yields 

˙Mr = d(ρr Vr )

dt = ˙ min − ˙mout , (14) 

˙Er = d(ρr hr Vr )

dt = ˙ min hin − ˙mout hout + Pr , (15) where the subscript r refers to refrigerant and Pr is the convective heat transfer between the wall and refrigerant. Expanding ˙Mr and ˙Er results in 

(

∂ρ r

∂p r

∣∣∣∣hr

˙pr + ∂ρ r

∂h r

∣∣∣∣pr

˙hr

)

Vr + ˙ mout − ˙min = 0 , (16) 

Φ1 ˙pr + Φ 2 ˙hr + ˙ mout hr,out − ˙min hr,in − Pr = 0 , (17) where 

Φ1 =

( ∂ρ r

∂p r

∣∣∣∣hr

hr − 1

)

Vr , (18) 

Φ2 =

(

∂ρ r

∂h r

∣∣∣∣pr

hr + ρr

)

Vr . (19) The quantities appearing in Φ1 and Φ2, including the density ρ and its thermodynamic derivatives (∂ρ r /∂p r )|hr

and (∂ρ r /∂h r )|pr , are obtained using fluid property lookup tables. Similarly, other properties such as temperature and vapor quality must generally be evaluated as functions of the local state. The heat transfer coefficient appearing in the power flow describing convective heat transfer, Pr =

hA s(T tail − T head ), may vary significantly with phase and flow regime and is typically modeled using empirical correlations. The mass flow rates are given by (12). As a representative example, Fig. 6 illustrates the graph-based representation of a two-phase fluid cold plate heat exchanger formulated using a two-state vertex. The state vector is defined as 

x = [hr pr Tw

]T , (20) and the flow vector is defined as 

Γ = [ ˙min hin ˙min ˙mout hr ˙mout Pr Pw

]T . (21) From [37], the capacitance matrix for the system is defined as 

C′ =

[Cr 00 Cw

]

, (22) where 

Cr =



Φ2 Φ1

> ∂ρ r
> ∂h r

∣∣∣pr

Vr ∂ρ r

> ∂p r

∣∣∣hr

Vr

 , (23) 

Cw = ( M c p)w . (24) From [27], the full system can be described by (9) where 

M ∗ S =

−1 0 1 0 −1 00 −1 0 1 0 00 0 0 0 1 −1

 . (25) Unlike in this simplified example, which uses a single control volume, two-phase heat exchangers are typically discretized into multiple control volumes to capture spatial variations in fluid states. The single-phase thermal-fluid system formulation de-scribed in Section III-A can be viewed as a special case of the two-phase thermal-fluid system formulation in which phase change is absent. In these cases, the thermodynamic process can be adequately described by a single state, reducing to the simpler single-state representation. 

Fig. 6: Example graph-based model for a cold plate with two-phase flow. TABLE III: Analogous modeling elements for mechanical and electrical systems.                    

> Compliant Inertial Mechanical State Force FVelocity v
> Capacitance Displacement xMomentum p
> Electrical State Voltage VCurrent I
> Capacitance Charge QFlux Linkage λ

The multi-state vertex graph formulation can be applied to other thermal-fluid components and other combinations of thermodynamic states. An example of such an application is presented in [27] for modeling turbomachinery, in which air is the working fluid and the relevant thermodynamics are dependent on both temperature and pressure dynamics. 

C. Electrical and Mechanical Systems 

Instead of presenting electrical and mechanical system modeling separately, they are presented together in the con-text of the mechanical-electrical analogy, the concept that mechanical systems can be represented as electrical networks and vice versa. Table III provides relevant similarities in the mechanical-electrical analogy that should be referenced while reading this section. Only translational mechanics are presented here, but the concepts can be extended to rotational mechanics as well. Both energy domains store energy in compliant (springs and capacitors) and inertial (masses and inductors) elements that correspond to force (spring), voltage (capacitor), velocity (mass), and current (inductor) states for the vertices of a graph-based model. Subsequently, the capacitance for each vertex is displacement d, charge Q, momentum p, and flux linkage λ. For many elements, the capacitance is the product of the element’s state variable x and characteristic property 

λp as 

C = λpx . (26) For fundamental mechanical and electrical components, the characteristic properties are spring compliance, electrical capacitance, mass, and inductance. In some cases it may be more convenient to represent the state and capacitance in other ways, such as an electrical battery where the state and capacitance are the state of charge and energy capacity, respectively. The capacitance of each element may be a nonlinear function of the state. In electrical and mechanical systems, there are a variety of ways that power can be transmitted or transformed, many more than can be exhaustively documented in this paper. Therefore, only the most common are described here. First, conventional mechanical and electrical power is useful for representing power transmission in a graph-based model. In this case, power is the product of the state variables: P = F v 

for mechanical systems and P = V I for electrical systems, or more generally 

P = xhead xtail . (27) Since power flows can be a function of at most two states, this implies that power transmission must be between alter-nating compliance and inertia elements (e.g., a force vertex adjacent to a velocity vertex). When building a graph-based model from a schematic, this concept may be counter-intuitive because it is common to find, for example, two capacitors in series. Such elements are directly connected in the circuit, but may not be directly connected in the graph-based model. There are two equivalent methods to address this chal-lenge. One approach is to simplify the system by combining the elements into a single lumped element (e.g., combine capacitors in series into a single equivalent capacitance). While this approach works well for many systems, there are some cases where the system is difficult or non-intuitive to simplify, like non-reducible topologies with algebraically coupled energy storage elements (e.g., an ideal transformer with capacitors across the primary and secondary windings). In these cases, one can insert a virtual element between the two elements (e.g., insert an inductor in series between the two capacitors. Virtual elements have zero capacitance, cre-ating an algebraic coupling between their adjacent elements. Placing virtual elements in a graph-based model is useful when building increasingly complex systems. Due to the zeroed capacitances, the differential equations in (5) and (6) then become differential-algebraic equations (DAEs). Another common power flow to represent is energy loss, often modeled using dampers or resistors in mechanical and electrical systems. These terms are useful to model the coupling between electrical and mechanical systems since mechanisms such as friction in gears or switching losses in power converters generate heat. Energy loss can generally modeled as 

P = λp(xtail )2 , (28) where λp is the element’s characteristic property like the dampening coefficient or resistance value (or their inverses) and may be a nonlinear function and/or input-dependent. While this is one common approach to model energy loss, there are variety of other ways that energy loss terms can be represented, such as with static friction P =

λpxtail sign (xtail ), where xtail is a velocity vertex. Using these forms, energy transfer is unidirectional, always flowing out of the electrical or mechanical elements. A third common power flow representation is power conversion, often present in devices such as gears, motors, 

> (a) Mass-spring-damper
> (b) Buck-converter
> (c) Electric motor

Fig. 7: Example graph-based models for (a) a mass-spring-damper, (b) a buck-converter, and (c) an electric motor. power converters, etc. Power conversion can commonly be represented as 

P = λpxhead xtail , (29) where λp is the element’s conversion ratio like the gear ratio or transformer ratio and may be a nonlinear function and/or input-dependent (e.g., a variable-speed transmission). These three common power flow representations can be used to model a wide variety of mechanical and electrical devices. Fig. 7 illustrates some common mechanical and electrical systems and components. IV. A PPLICATIONS TO CONTROL AND DESIGN 

OPTIMIZATION 

Beyond offering a convenient way to construct the analyt-ical governing equations for a multi-domain energy system, the network structure encoded in graph-based models (e.g., via the capacitance matrix C and incidence matrix M

in (6)) can be directly exploited for analysis, control design, estimation, design optimization, and other purposes. This section highlights several examples from the recent liter-ature, spanning both theoretical and applied contributions. Section IV-A focuses on feedback control, while Section IV-B focuses on design optimization. 

A. Decentralized and Hierarchical MPC 

Graph-based models provide a structure that can be used to develop and analyze feedback control strategies. Graph-based modeling has been primarily developed to capture the dynamics of multi-domain and multi-timescale energy systems, where the control objectives balance performance, efficiency, and safety. The operation of energy systems is often limited by both input constraints as well as key state and output constraints that must be satisfied to maintain safety. However, maximizing performance and efficiency often requires operating the system close to these safety constraints, where conservatism in the control design to guarantee constraint satisfaction can unnecessarily reduce performance and efficiency. Therefore, centralized, decentralized, and hierarchical con-trol approaches based on model predictive control (MPC) have been developed that maximize performance and ef-ficiency while explicitly accounting for safety constraints. Moreover, the design and closed-loop analysis of these MPC controllers leverage the unique graph structure. The follow-ing provides an example of how the graph-based structure helps to establish the passivity of a general class of energy systems, which is then used to guarantee closed-loop stability of decentralized MPC controllers. Then several simulation-based and experimental applications of hierarchical MPC highlight how the graph structure is used to identify the control architecture and reduced-order models used at each level of the control hierarchy. As shown in (6), the graph-based model captures the structure of a dynamic system in the form of the partitioned incidence matrix M ∈ RNVd ×NE and the vector of power flows P ∈ RNE , where each element of P corresponds to the power flow along an edge of the graph. The first theoretical result leveraging this structure shows that graph-based models are passive (in the sense of [58]) for a specific choice of inputs and outputs under certain mild assumptions on the power flow equations [56]. Specifically, let the power flow defined in (2) have the form 

Pj = fj

(xtail  

> j

, x head 

> j

) + gj

(xtail  

> j

, x head 

> j

) uj , (30) where xtail  

> j

and xhead  

> j

are the state of the tail and head vertices for edge ej ∈ E . Here the power flow is a nonlinear function of these vertex states but an affine function of con-trol input uj . Additionally, it is assumed that fj is Lipschitz, twice continuously differentiable, and fj (0 , 0) = 0 while gj

is continuous, gj (0 , 0) = 0 , and the intersection of the zero sets of gj is the origin, i.e., ⋂ 

> j

N (gj

(xtail  

> j

, x head 

> j

)) = {0}.With the additional structure from (30), (6) can be rewritten as 

C ˙x(t) = −M F (x, xt) − M G (x, xt)u + DP in , (31) where F (x, xt), G(x, xt), u ∈ RNE are vectors of elements from (30) for each edge of the graph. The external power flows P in are assumed to directly affect a subset of states xin . Additionally, the power flows from the system to the sink states are denoted as P out .In [56], this particular structure is used to show that the system (31) is passive from inputs u to outputs y where 

u =

P in 

u

−xt

 , y =



xin 

yP out 

 , (32) and y = −G(x, xt)( M ⊤x + M ⊤xt).As shown in Fig. 8, the passivity of individual subsystems can be established using similar definitions of inputs and outputs, where the dynamic coupling between subsystems creates a negative feedback loop. Thus, a dynamic system can be proven to be passive if each of its subsystems are 

Fig. 8: Block diagram showing the negative feedback con-nection created by power flow between passive subsystems [56]. 

Fig. 9: Block diagram showing the negative feedback con-nection between subsystem Si and its MPC controller Ci

designed with the passivity constraint (33) [56]. passive, leveraging the fact that passivity is preserved under negative feedback. Moreover, the closed-loop system is proven to be passive and, therefore, stable under decentralized control if the controller for each subsystem Si is designed to be passive from yi to ui, as shown in Fig. 9. To ensure the passivity of each subsystem controller, the MPC formulation can be augmented with the constraints 

˙zi = u⊤ 

> i

yi , z(τ ) ≤ βi , τ ∈ [0 , T ] , (33) where z ∈ R is an auxiliary state representing the accumula-tion of passivity and βi > 0 is a predetermined finite constant that limits the time the controller is allowed to operate with a deficiency of passivity. In this example, graph-based modeling provided the struc-ture needed to identify the passivity of these systems and developed decentralized MPC controllers where the closed-loop system is guaranteed to be stable. This work has been extended to the decentralized control of hybrid dynamic systems, where the power flow along edges can be switched on and off [57]. A separate branch of theoretical analysis in [59], [60] established conditions under which switched graph-based models are cooperative (in the sense of [61]) and leveraged this to guarantee robustness of state constraints under a hierarchical MPC framework. Beyond providing valuable approaches for analysis and theoretical guarantees, the structure of graph-based models also offers practical value in developing hierarchical con-trollers for multi-timescale dynamic systems. Graph-based models were first used for hierarchical control in [19], [54], where [54] proposes hierarchical MPC to specifically address the multi-timescale dynamics common to energy systems and [19] develops a three-level hierarchy to control the engine, electrical, and thermal systems of a simulated aircraft. In these initial efforts, the graph structure of the sys-tem dynamics is used to manually decompose into multiple dynamically-coupled subsystems. At the lowest level of the hierarchy, the system is decomposed into many small sub-systems, each with its own MPC-based controller designed with a relatively fast update rate to account for the fastest timescales of the system and to effectively reject unknown disturbances. The higher levels of the hierarchy are formed by the re-composition of subsystem graphs from the lower levels and order reduction to remove states associated with the fast timescale dynamics. While not directly associated with the eigenvalues of the system, each system state in the graph-based approach has an associated vertex and capac-itance. In this work, the magnitudes of these capacitances are used to label each vertex as either fast, medium, or slow. Moving up the three-level hierarchy, fast vertices are treated as algebraic at the middle level of the hierarchy to reduce the number of dynamic states, while both fast and medium vertices are treated as algebraic at the upper-most level to allow the single controller at the top of the hierarchy to focus on planning the behavior of the slowest timescale dynamics over a long prediction horizon. While these initial efforts produced practical hierarchical MPC controllers, the decomposition of the system graph was a suboptimal manual process and the hierarchical controllers lacked theoretical guarantees of stability or constraint satisfaction. Going beyond the initial efforts from [19], [54], more systematic methods have been developed that leverage the graph structure of the system model to identify how the model should be decomposed into subsystem models used by controllers at each level of a hierarchical controller. In [13], hierarchical agglomerative clustering based on a novel energy-based distance metric explicitly uses the graph struc-ture of the model to identify subsystem decompositions that minimize the uncertainty in power flow between neighboring subsystems. In [17], Koopman operator theory provides a mechanism to decompose the states of a graph-based model by timescale and inform the design of a hierarchical con-troller. Ref. [62] additionally combines Koopman operator theory and deep learning with graph-based representations to learn control-oriented dynamics from data. A fundamental challenge in the model-based control of energy systems is their strong nonlinearities. For MPC, this often requires either solving nonlinear optimization problems online or approximating nonlinearities by a different form, with Taylor series linearization [35] and piece-wise linear models [59] as the most common choices. Alternatively, [41] proposes a “lifting linearization” approach that augments the structure of a graph-based model with additional vertices whose dynamics are trained from data to approximate nonlin-earities, producing a linear model that still obeys the graph-based framework and respects conservation of energy. This demonstrates that the physics-informed graph structure can provide utility in combination with data-based methods, in-cluding cases where multiple empirically-derived parameters like heat transfer coefficients can be simultaneously trained from data rather than addressed individually. The graph structure is further leveraged in [25], where control co-design is used to simultaneously optimize physical system parameters along with the architecture and design parameters of a hierarchical MPC controller. Both [13] and [25] demonstrate the value of using graph-based models for hierarchical control design when applied to the modeling and control of the power systems for electric vehicles. Centralized and hierarchical MPC controllers using graph-based models for prediction have been experimentally val-idated in several studies, including [18], [35], [63] with single-phase thermal management testbeds, [20] with a UAV powertrain testbed, and [21] with the coupling of a thermal management and UAV powertrain testbed. 

B. Dynamic Design Optimization 

Graph-based models can be leveraged to optimize energy system sizing and topology while accounting for transient behavior. Requirements for next-generation energy systems, such as increased power production to meet the escalating needs of data centers [64], have placed a greater emphasis on model-based design tools. Integration of optimization methods with graphical tools is advantageous in that it can provide intuitive correlations between graphs and physical design features of interest. The graph-based modeling framework presented in this paper can be used for design optimization as well as control co-design (CCD) to simultaneously define plant and con-troller features. 

1) Control Co-Design: For design and CCD with plant sizing requirements, a four step methodology is recom-mended to prepare and solve the associated optimization problems [23]. Given a baseline model described by (5), plant design variables θ, and controller design variables ϕ,the first step augments the model into 

Ψc(θ)C ˙x(t) = −M Ψ(θ)P (t) . (34) The diagonal matrix Ψc serves to scale the size of the vertices and the corresponding storage capacitances. Each entry i of Ψc contains a function ψc,i (θ), mapping plant de-sign variable values to the dynamics. Similarly, the diagonal matrix Ψ serves to scale the edges of the graph, with each entry j of Ψ containing a function ψj (θ). These functions and the design variables can be continuous (for sizing) or discrete (for architecture/topology adjustment). The second and third steps define expressions for the objective and optimization problem constraints, respectively. The objective function J is often a weighted sum of inde-pendent or conflicting terms. Example terms include energy passing through the edges or the integral of state tracking error squared [14]. The most common constraint is the augmented graph-based model of (34), with defined profiles for xs(t) if performance is to be evaluated under specified environmental conditions. Tied to this is a constraint de-scribing the initial conditions x0. If controller design is part of the goals, a control law Fc is structured as a function of the vertex states, design variables, references to track, and bounds for states and inputs. Nearly all optimization problems involving graph-based models define lower ( θ, ϕ)and upper ( θ, ϕ) design variable bounds. The fourth recommended step compiles all of these el-ements into a full optimization problem. A generalized example with objective function FJ is 

min  

> θ,ϕ

J =

∫ tf

> 0

FJ (τ, θ, ϕ) dτ 

s.t.: Ψc(θ)C ˙x(t) = −M Ψ(θ)P (t)

x(0) = x0

u(t) = Fc(x(t), xs(t), θ, ϕ)

θ ≤ θ ≤ θϕ ≤ ϕ ≤ ϕ ,

(35) with all time-dependent constraints applied from t = 0

to final time t = tf . Note that x(t), u(t), and P (t) are implicit decision variables to be determined from the relevant equality constraints and power flow expressions. A variety of solution methods are available to solve (35), such as combining forward simulation of the dynamics for a given set of design variable values with a genetic algorithm (GA). Solution algorithms can take advantage of the modular nature of the graph-based models to decompose the optimization problem into smaller subproblems [33]. To show how graph-based models can be used for design, a few examples are highlighted below. The first example focuses on a scenario where only plant parameters and features need to be determined, with the control law Fc fixed using predefined trajectories. Fig. 10 presents a visual representation of a graph-based model before and after applying the outlined methodology. For this electric vehicle (EV) design problem [10], using (35) leads to a reduced size of the battery pack, as well as selection of air vs. liquid cooling for individual components. The second example focuses on CCD, showing how the outlined methodology facilitates design for even nontra-ditional objectives and stationary systems. Microgrids are increasingly developed to solely power data centers. Not only must these provide sufficient and regulated power, but there are expectations that these systems must be manufactured and operated without harmful effect on local and global environments. Integration of environmental sustainability goals for microgrids and data centers is supported by graph-based modeling with CCD. Fig. 11 shows how the outcomes of applying the four step methodology informs a tradeoff analysis: the Pareto front contains designs with different levels of balancing between manufacturing-stage greenhouse gas production and waste heat generated during operation. 𝑣 5 𝑣 4               

> 𝑣 3
> 𝑣 2𝑣 1
> 𝑣 7𝑣 6
> 𝑣 12
> 𝑣 10 𝑣 11 𝑣 8𝑣 9𝑣 13
> 𝑣 14
> 𝑣 22 𝑣 2
> 𝑠
> 𝑣 15
> 𝑣 76 𝑣 77 𝑣 78 𝑣 79 𝑣 75
> 𝑣 7𝑣 6
> 𝑣 12
> 𝑣 10 𝑣 11 𝑣 8𝑣 9𝑣 13
> 𝑣 14
> 𝑣 22 𝑣 2
> 𝑠
> 𝑣 15
> 𝑣 65 𝑣 66 𝑣 67 𝑣 68 𝑣 64
> 𝑣 1𝑣 2
> 𝑣 3
> 𝑣 4𝑣 5
> (a)
> (b)

Fig. 10: Electric vehicle powertrain subsystem design changes from (a) air cooling to (b) liquid cooling with a reduced battery pack size, achieved by resizing vertices and selecting connecting edges through optimization methods. 120 140 160 180 200 220 

> Jo
> 3456
> Jm
> 10 6

Fig. 11: Design options (black) and Pareto front (cyan) comparing manufacturing-stage (Jm) and operation-stage (Jo) environmental impact in kg of CO 2 equivalent [65]. An insight provided by this CCD study is that reducing greenhouse gas production from manufacturing should be emphasized over reducing waste heat from an environmental standpoint [65]. 

2) Architecture Design Exploration: Another aspect of design optimization concerns examining the system archi-tecture itself and how it influences the dynamic behavior of the system. Given a set of components, enumeration algorithms can be used to enumerate all feasible candidate architectures. While it would be extremely time-intensive to rederive the governing equations for each of these candidate system architectures, given graph-based representations of each individual component, “stitching” algorithms can be designed to construct a representation of the dynamics of the system using the individual component graphs. This was first explored with the graph-based modeling framework in [43] for a specific class of single-phase cooling systems, where the candidate graph architectures were enumerated via en-coding in labeled rooted trees. In [36], one method to do this is proposed that couples the dynamics of single-state graph models, multi-state graph models, and algebraic models (not represented by graphs). The method is summarized here. Given architecture connectivity information, component models are merged into a system graph with algebraic vertices (dashed) and dynamic states (solid) (see Fig. 12). Fig. 12: System graph corresponding to formulation with boundary condition (dashed), algebraic (double-circled) and dynamic (solid) vertices. Algebraic vertices included component graph sink vertices and exogenous boundary condition sink vertices. Algebraic models directly compute outlet states as a function of the inlet states and parameters, but all algebraic vertices are fun-damentally governed by algebraic relationships. The combi-nation of algebraic models and dynamic graph-based models results in a DAE system that is used to accurately capture system transients. In system graphs, algebraic vertices that follow dynamic vertices are assigned an identical state to enforce continuity. The algebraic and dynamic states are concatenated into a global state vector x, defined as 

x =

[ xalg 

xdyn 

]

, (36) where xalg and xdyn capture algebraic “states” and dynamic states respectively. Unlike dynamic graph-based models, algebraic models do not have mathematically defined derivatives. As such, ˙xdyn 

contains calculable expressions while ˙xalg contributes entries of 0, such that 

˙x =

[ ˙xalg 

˙xdyn 

]

=

[ 0

˙xdyn 

]

, (37) where 

C′ 

> dyn

˙xdyn = −(M ∗ S)dyn Γdyn . (38) A vector F is defined that characterizes algebraic relation-ships that govern algebraic states. As such, F alg now con-tains calculable expressions while F dyn contributes entries of 0, such that 

F =

[ F alg 

F dyn 

]

=

[F alg 

0

]

. (39) For the example shown in Fig. 13, F alg is given by 

F alg =



x1 − BC x2 − x1

x3 − (x2 + ∆ xpump )

 , (40) where BC is an exogenous boundary condition model input. The rows of equation (40) correspond to three types of algebraic constraints: prescription, continuity, and model. A 

Fig. 13: Algebraic model with boundary condition and alge-braic vertices. 

Fig. 14: 3D histogram depicting the distribution of 164 sys-tem architectures, each optimized to minimize total entropy generation over a dynamic mission profile, with respect to total entropy generated and L2 norm of bleed air mass flow rate [30]. square mass matrix Smass is used by a DAE solver internally to distinguish between algebraic and dynamic states. Asystem with Na algebraic states and Nd dynamic states defines the mass matrix as 

Smass =

[0Na×Na 0Na×Nd

0Nd×Na INd

]

. (41) A vector R representing the system is given by 

R = Smass ˙x − F , (42) where R contains all information necessary for a DAE solver to stitch components and simulate a system graph given component models and an arbitrary system configuration. This method enables transient simulation of the system graph, but also can be used for design exploration or opti-mization over each architecture. This was done for single-phase components in [30] to find the most efficient system architecture, and its associated parameters, with respect to both first and second law efficiency metrics (Fig. 14). As in the case of CCD discussed earlier, a feature of this approach is that it enables dynamic design optimization of the thermal system. V. T OOLBOX OVERVIEW 

While the previous sections highlighted some of the concepts and applications of graph based models, many of the results presented in the references came from indepen-dently developed and closed-source codebases. To aid in the adoption of the idea, an open source toolbox would be useful. The graph-based modeling toolbox (GMT) is a MATLAB-based toolbox designed to streamline the work-flow required to leverage graph-based models in control synthesis and optimization methods, as described in previous sections. Users generate system graphs and their associated dynamic equations by connecting elements from a library of component models. The toolbox development has been an aggregation of capabilities and codebases created over the past decade. GMT is built for MATLAB R2025A or later, along with Simulink, Stateflow, and the Symbolic Math Toolbox. GMT is installed using a .mltbx file, which installs the toolbox as a MATLAB add-on. The toolbox is available open source and located at github.com/psu-PAC-Lab/graph-model-toolbox. GMT uses object-orient programming (OOP) to synthesize system and component models from graph elements. Key OOP definitions utilized in this section are classes, super-classes, subclasses, objects, properties, and methods. Classes are general structures composed of properties and methods. Superclasses and subclasses describe the hierarchical rela-tionship between classes. The key concept is that a subclass inherits the superclass methods and properties. Methods are functions that operate on a class and properties are data associated with a class. Lastly, an object is a unique instance of a class. This section present examples from the initial open-source release to demonstrate using toolbox classes, methods, and features. Users are expected to reference the latest toolbox documentation descriptions, as future releases may change descriptions. For readability, workspace variables are assigned for each input to a given class method and subsequently passed to the respective method inputs. Object instances are created using constructor methods, which share the same name as their respective classes. 

A. Main Toolbox Classes 

There are several classes within the toolbox to facilitate modeling. The main toolbox classes are arranged in a hier-archical structure to represent their relationships. Table IV lists each toolbox class and its description. Both component and system models are composed of the same classes. Most classes in the toolbox have optional input arguments associated with each class and follow the same structure when exercising. When using optional input arguments in the toolbox, each option requires two arguments: The first specifies the option being used and is entered as a string data type, while the second specifies the data associated with that option, which has a unique data type. All optional inputs must be entered after the required class inputs have been entered. Multiple optional input arguments can be used concurrently by concatenating them. 

B. Generating Object from Component Library 

Each component model in the library is its own subclass of the gmt_Graph superclass. Subclasses inherit the prop-erties and methods from the superclass. Most component models only require a string data type input argument to describe the object being instantiated. Some components TABLE IV: Main toolbox classes.        

> Class Description
> gmt_Graph Graph Model
> gmt_Edge Graph Edge
> gmt_vertices Graph Vertex
> gmt_Parameter Model Parameter
> gmt_Input Model Input
> gmt_Port Connection Port

TABLE V: Built-in reports and visualization.         

> Method Function
> gmt_ReportGraph Tabular Edge and Vertex Data
> gmt_ReportParameter Tabular Model Parameter Data
> gmt_ReportInput Tabular Model Input Data
> gmt_ReportPort Tabular Connection Port Data
> gmt_ReportInitCon Tabular Initial Condition Data
> gmt_ReportFull Generates All Reports
> gmt_PlotGraph Plots and Labels Graph Figure

require additional input arguments, which can be found in the help section of the toolbox. Objects are created by calling the respective component class constructor method with its required input arguments. The constructor method output is the instantiated object, which must be assigned a workspace variable name to be used in the future. A recommend practice is to match the constructor method name input argument with the workspace variable name to aid in connecting component models. A thermal-fluid tank object is created below from the gmt_Tank class. The variable 

name is assigned to "mainTank" and provided as an input argument to gmt_Tank constructor. The resulting object is stored in the workspace variable mainTank .      

> >> name ="mainTank" >> mainTank =gmt_Tank(name)

C. Built-In Graph-Based Model Reports and Visualization 

The generalized framework that OOP provides allows the toolbox to standardize report generation and visualization within the toolbox by calling the associated method from any object that is a gmt_Graph class or subclass. Both com-ponent and system models use the same method and syntax to execute. Table V outlines the built-in graph-based model reports and visualization. A full report for the MainTank 

object created in Section V-B can be generated by calling the 

gmt_ReportFull method from the MainTank object.  

> >> MainTank.gmt_ReportFull

D. Connecting Component Models 

A static method gmt_Combine from the gmt_Graph 

class is used to connect multiple component models. A static method does not require an object when calling but must reference the associated class. The gmt_Combine method has three input arguments. The first input is a string data type representing the name of system. The second input is an n × 2 cell array in which each cell contains a component object defined in the workspace. The objects in the first column have priority during the connection process, meaning all properties associated with the connected edge or vertex will be inherited from the primary object. The third input is an n × 2 numerical array specifying the port numbers, where each port corresponds to a component class edge or vertex number associated with each object in the component cell array. The method returns the resulting system object. Tank and heat load component models are connected together below by connecting the tank output advection on port two to the heat load input advection on port one. A new thermal-fluid heat load object is created from the gmt_HeatLoad class. The variable name is as-signed to "heatLoad" and provided as an input argument to gmt_HeatLoad constructor. The resulting object is stored in the workspace variable heatLoad . The vari-able nameSys is assigned to "Sys" . The variable Cmp 

is assigned to a cell array where the first column is the 

mainTank object, created in Section V-B, and the second column is the heatLoad object. The variable Prt defines a numerical array where the first column contains the number 

2 corresponding to port two of mainTank object and the second column contains the number 1 corresponding to port one of heatLoad object. Variables nameSys , Cmp , Prt 

are passed as input arguments to the gmt_Combine static method from the gmt_Graph class. The returned system object is assigned to workspace variable Sys .                   

> >> name ="HeatLoad" >> heatLoad =gmt_HeatLoad(name) >> nameSys ="Sys" >> Cmp ={{mainTank},{heatLoad}} >> Prt =[2, 1] >> Sys =gmt_Graph.gmt_Combine(nameSys,Cmp, Prt)

E. Defining Initial Conditions 

Initial conditions can be defined during or after object instantiation. An initial condition report aids in understand-ing the associated vertex number, description, units, and if assigned, the initial condition value. All initial conditions must be specified when assigned. Initials conditions can be added when instantiating a component object using the optional input argument "InitCon" followed by the initial condition vector. Another method adds initial conditions after a component is assigned to the workspace. Initial conditions are added to the thermal-fluid tank object MainTank be-low after it was instantiated in Section V-B. The variable 

ic_val is assigned to a row vector with 300 in the first column and 600 in the second column, corresponding to the first and second state, respectively. The variable ic_cal is passed as an input argument to the gmt_InitCond method called from the mainTank object in the workspace. The method adds the initial conditions and the output is assigned to mainTank .      

> >> ic_val =[300,6000] >> mainTank =mainTank.gmt_InitCon(ic_val)

F. Creating a New Component Model 

Component models are subclasses from the gmt_Graph 

superclass that consist of an edge, vertex, input, parameter, port, and edge to vertex pair arrays. All descriptions defined in edges, vertices, parameters, and inputs are used to describe the physical the meaning of the associated object and do not change the underlying mathematics of the model. However, mislabeling descriptions will make the model more difficult to understand, especially in complex systems with many states and power flows. In addition, all equations entered for each class must use standard MATLAB syntax for mathematical expressions. Each new component model must define a new class that references the gmt_Graph superclass. A template called 

gmt_Component can be found in the component library, which outlines all the required inputs and associated syntax. GMT parses user equations entered as string data types to create the model system of equations. Users create edge and vertex objects from the respective edge and vertex classes. All edge and vertex objects are assumed to be internal to the system unless an optional input argument is entered. Externality for edges and vertices can be defined by designating the object as external using the optional input argument, "External" , followed by a true logical statement. Vertex, input, and parameter classes can have units as-signed to each object instance by using the optional input argument, "Units" , followed by the string data type des-ignating the units. Similar to descriptions, units are only used to describe the physical meaning of associated object. Readers should refer to Section V-A to understand the full requirements for utilizing optional input arguments. An edge class gmt_Edge defines the edge equation and describes the edge power flow. The edge class requires two input arguments, with an optional input for externality. The first input argument is a string data type that describes the edge while the second input argument is a string data type that defines the edge equation in terms of the xhead and xtail 

states using the syntax xh and xt , respectively. The method returns an edge object. A edge object representing input advection for a thermal-fluid component is created below from the gmt_Edge class. The variable name is assigned to "Advection In" . The variable edgeEq is assigned to "cp_f*u1*xt" where 

cp_f is the fluid specific heat, u1 is the mass flow of the edge, and xt is the tail state variable connected to the edge. Both variable name and edgeEq are passed to the gmt_Edge constructor method as input arguments. The returned edge object is assigned to the first index of the workspace variable E, which represents all the edge objects contained within a given component model class.           

> >> name ="Advection In" >> edgeEq ="cp_f*u1*xt" >> E(1) =gmt_Edge(name,edgeEq)

A vertex class gmt_Vertex defines the left-hand side of (1) for each vertex. For dynamic vertices, this is a function of the state derivative ˙x and may also be a function of the state x itself. The state derivative can also be omitted from this equation to create an algebraic state. The vertex class requires two input arguments, with optional inputs for externality and units. The first required input argument is a string data type that describes the vertex, while the second input argument is a string data type that defines the vertex equation in terms of the state derivative and the state using the syntax x_dot and x, respectively. Vertex equations specified using the state derivative in the form C*x_dot 

or C*x*x_dot , where C is a coefficient representing all or part of the vertex capacitance, will define a dynamic state type, meaning the power flows define a differential equation for the state. In the example C*x*x_dot , where both the state and state derivative are specified, the capacitance is defined as C*x .A vertex object representing the fluid temperature for a thermal-fluid component is created below from the 

gmt_Vertex class. The variable name is assigned to 

"Fluid Temperature" . The variable vertexEq is as-signed to "cp_f*V_f*rho*x_dot" where cp_f is the fluid specific heat parameter, V_f is the vertex volume parameter, rho is the fluid density parameter, and x_dot is the state derivative. The variable opt1 is assigned to "Units", and the variable units is assigned to "K" , representing the temperature units in Kelvin. All four variables are passed to the gmt_Vertex constructor method as input arguments. The returned vertex object is assigned to the first index of the workspace variable V, which represents all the vertex objects contained within a given component model class.                 

> >> name ="Fluid Temperature" >> vertexEq ="cp_f*V_f*rho*x_dot" >> opt1 ="Units" >> units ="K" >> V(1) =gmt_Vertex(name,capEq,opt1,units)

A parameter class gmt_Parameter defines the pa-rameterization variables for a given model and describes the parameter variable within the model. Both scalar and MATLAB native lookup tables are supported. Future support for MATLAB native neural networks is planned, as neural network-based estimation of fluid properties can provide improved balance between computational efficiency and ac-curacy when compared to lookup tables and polynomial methods [66]. The class requires three input arguments, with two optional arguments, which define the parameter units and whether a variable is an optimization parameter. The first input argument is a descriptive name for the parameter, the second input argument is a variable name or an expression that relates a variable to a lookup table in terms of the state variables, and the third input is the numeric data associated with the parameter. Both the first and second input arguments are entered as string data types. Scalar parameters assign a scalar numeric data type to the data input whereas lookup tables assign the data in the form of a structure data type. Each field name under the structure must match the variable defined in the parameter variable expression. Parameters defined as optimization variables will not have numeric values substituted in for variables when a final symbolic expression is generated. Section V-J in the paper outlines the process for obtaining symbolic expressions for models. A fluid specific heat parameter object is instantiated below from the gmt_Parameter class. Each variable is assigned its respective value: name is assigned to 

"Fluid Specific Heat" , var is assigned to cp_f ,

val is assigned to 3300, opt1 is assigned to "Units" and 

units is assigned to "kJ/(kg*K)" . All five variables are passed to the gmt_Parameter constructor method as input arguments. The returned parameter object is assigned to the first index of the workspace variable Pa , which represents all the parameter objects contained within a given component model class.                     

> >> name ="Fluid Specific Heat" >> var ="cp_f" >> val =3300 >> opt1 ="Units" >> units ="kJ/(kg*K)" >> Pa(1) =gmt_Parameter(name,var,val,opt1, units)

An input class defines the model input variables and describes the input variables within the model. An input class has two required input arguments to create an object, with an optional input to define the units. The first input argument is a string data type that describes the physical meaning of the input, and the second input is a string data type that defines the input variable. Input variable syntax uses the character u followed by a number. The best practice is to number the inputs in numerical order starting from one for each component class. An input object is created below from the gmt_Input 

class. Each variable is assigned its respective value: name 

is assigned to "Inlet Mass Flow 1" , var is assigned to "u1" , opt1 is assigned to "Units" and units is assigned to "kg/s" . All four variables are passed to the 

gmt_Input constructor method as input arguments. The returned input object is assigned to the first index of the workspace variable I, which represents all the inputs objects contained within a given component model class.                   

> >> name ="Inlet Mass Flow 1" >> var ="u1" >> opt1 ="Units" >> units ="kg/s" >> I(1) =gmt_Input(name,var,opt1,units)

A port class defines the model connection points, which can be either an edge or a vertex. The port class requires three input arguments to create an object. The first input is a string data type that defines the connection type, which is either an EdgeConnection or VertexConnection ,the second input is a numerical data type that defines the edge or vertex number associated with the connection, and the third input defines the connection energy domain. A port object is created below from the gmt_Port class. Each variable is assigned its respective value: conType is assigned to "EdgeConnection" , num is assigned to 1 and domain is assigned to "Thermal" . All three variables are passed to the gmt_Port constructor method as input arguments. The returned input object is assigned to the first index of the workspace variable Po , which represents all the ports objects contained within a given component model class.             

> >> conType ="EdgeConnection" >> num =1>> domain ="Thermal" >> Po(1) =gmt_Port(conType,num,domain)

An edge matrix defines the edge to vertex relationship for a given model and is used to create the incidence matrix for the model. The edge matrix is a two-column array where the first column is the tail vertex and the second column is the head vertex. An edge matrix variable is created below. The first row in the array defines the edge 1 connection as starting from vertex 2 and ending to vertex 1. The starting vertex corresponds to the tail vertex and the ending vertex corresponds to the head vertex.     

> >> EdgeMatrix =[2 1];

G. Input Dependencies 

GMT does not automatically handle input dependencies because the components within a system could change the input dependencies and a case-specific automation algorithm is expected to be complex. An example would be a thermal-fluid junction with n input mass flow rates and m output mass flow rates. In this case, the output mass flow rates could be a function of the input mass flow rates, a function of a downstream connected component like a pump, or a combination of the two. Therefore, a simplified approach was selected by creating a method for the user to specify the input dependencies within the model. The input depen-dency method gmt_InputCommon can be called from any 

gmt_Graph object and requires one input argument. The input argument is a two-column string array where the first column is the current input variable and the second column is the new input variable. The new input variable can be a math-ematical expression. The inputs for a split junction object called Split are combined below. The variable common 

is assigned to a string array ["u3", "(u1+u2)"] . The object Split calls the gmt_InputCommon method and passes the variable common as an input argument in the method. The returned object is a new object Split that replaces every occurrence of u3 in the expression with 

(u1+u2) .       

> >> common =["u3", "(u1+u2)"] >> Split =Split.gmt_InputCommon(common)

H. MATLAB Command Line Simulation 

The command line simulation feature allows systems to be simulated directly in the command line. Similar to initial conditions, MATLAB command line simulations can be built during or after object instantiation. The command line simulation feature builds an ODE function and simulation script m-file for the associated object and then saves the files to a user-specified file path. The simulation files for the 

mainTank object created in Section V-B are built below after the object is instantiated to the workspace. A variable 

fp is assigned to string(pwd) , which is the current work-ing directory in MATLAB. The gmt_BuildSim method is called from the mainTank object with fp assigned as an input argument. The expression is assigned to the 

mainTank object to overwrite the existing object in the workspace. The resulting simulation files are stored in a new folder in the current working directory.       

> >> fp =string(pwd) >> mainTank =mainTank.gmt_BuildSim(fp)

Alternatively, the optional input argument "BuildSim" 

followed by the path name as a second input argument can be used to build the simulation files during object instantiation. 

I. Simulink Simulation 

A Simulink library block was created to simulate graph-based models in a Simulink environment by computing and integrating the state derivatives as a function of control inputs, disturbances, and user-defined external model param-eters. A block mask is used to update the mask variable descriptions, MATLAB function block code, and block port configuration. Users specify the workspace object variable name, initial conditions, and initial condition source in the mask and then the block is updated using the specified workspace object, which must be in the MATLAB workspace and a gmt_Graph class or subclass. Users can specify unique initial conditions or use initial conditions in the workspace object by selecting the optional check box. All MATLAB function code originates from the mask defined workspace variable, including any parameters that are not designated as optimization variables. Fig. 15 shows the updated Simulink mask for a mainTank object with initial conditions defined in the workspace object. The model has two control inputs representing the tank inlet and outlet mass flow rates, one disturbance representing the input advection source temperature, no external model parameters, and two states representing the tank mass and fluid temperature. 

J. Built-In Control Synthesis 

A method, gmt_ControlModel , was developed to pro-vide linear approximation of a nonlinear dynamic system at a point x0 and u0 using a first-order Taylor expansion. A general nonlinear dynamic system is defined as 

˙x = f (x, u) . (43) After a first-order Taylor expansion, the linear approximation of the nonlinear dynamic system can be expressed as 

˙xlin = Ax lin + Bu + Z , (44) where ˙xlin is a column vector of linearized state derivatives expressed in terms of matrices A and B, vector Z, linearized states xlin , and control inputs u. Matrices A and B are partial derivatives of the nonlinear system dynamics taken with respect to states x and control inputs u, respectively. Fig. 15: Example Simulink library block mask. Both partial derivatives are evaluated at the linearization point x0 and u0 and are written as 

A = ∂f (x, u)

∂x

∣∣∣x=x0

> u=u0

B = ∂f (x, u)

∂u

∣∣∣x=x0

> u=u0

. (45) The vector Z is a affine transformation to represent the linear approximation in absolute terms rather than as a deviation from the linearization point. This is defined as 

Z = ˙x0 − Ax 0 − Bu 0 , (46) where ˙x0 is a column vector of state derivatives computed by evaluating f (x0, u0). The method returns symbolic ex-pressions for A, B, and Z as a function of x0 and u0 to support model-based control design. 

K. Equation Exporting 

All gmt_Graph class and subclass objects, which rep-resent the model parameterization with analytical expres-sions, have a system of equations that can be exported for use in other programming languages, such as Python. Two expression options are available for exporting, depending on the requirements. The first is an analytical expression without numerical value substitution for all parameters. The second is an analytical expressions with numerical value substitution for parameters that are not designated as opti-mization variables. Both expressions are accessed under the 

ModelMetadata property of the object. 

L. Future Planned Capability 

GMT has future capability planned to support building a system graph model from a Simulink block diagram of connected components. The feature will be designed to aid engineers in building a graph-based model from a graphical user interface rather than command line. In addition, GMT will have a workflow for creating an MPC formulation, using the graph-based model for prediction. VI. C ONCLUSION , F UTURE DIRECTIONS , 

> AND

OPEN PROBLEMS 

This paper introduces the use of graph-based models as tools to represent systems that satisfy conservation laws such as conservation of energy or conservation of mass. While there are certainly approaches that can provide higher-fidelity results than the proposed method, the approach has advantages that would be useful for the control designer to have in their arsenal of tools. Two of the advantages discussed are (a) the ability to use the tools from graph theory to understand model structure and topology as well as (b) the ability to compartmentalize models in a formal manner. The second advantage plays well into model-based systems engineering (MBSE) for systems that are under design, allowing for design tradeoffs on various components to be easily made while still in the early design stages of a system. As illustrated in the text, there are myriad uses of these for a wide range of applications. Energy domains such as thermal, electrical, mechanical, and chemical have all been previously represented in the literature. Detailed examples illustrate how the tools are applied to specific components and how these components can be integrated into larger systems. By providing examples of modeling from both the thermal-fluid domains as well as the electro-mechanical domains, the paper demonstrates the broad applicability of the general approach. The two advantages listed above are demonstrated to be useful in the control of dynamical systems using various de-grees of centralized optimization. Appropriate decomposition and compartmentalization appropriately determine the right levels of subsystem aggregation for controller design. This includes the types of multi-timescale dynamics prevalent in energy systems, where subsystems can operate across a wide range of timescales. Hierarchical control approaches are particularly effective in this case. In addition to the optimization of the control algorithm, it is possible to use the modularity and composability of systems presented in a graph format to allow for optimization of the plant along with the controller. This is the co-design problem. Parametric system changes can be represented through edge or vertex parameters, and topological system changes can be represented by graph connectivity. These can be exploited to aid in the control co-design process more efficiently than many other system model formulations. Several of these benefits were introduced before in the literature covered by this tutorial. One key new contribution in this tutorial is the introduction of an open-source toolbox presented to the broader research community to allow easy access to these tools. The goal is to greatly reduce any barriers to entry for researchers who wish to augment their existing tools with these. Examples from this toolbox are included to help future readers upskill quickly in this domain. Although significant research has been done with this graph-based modeling approach to date, the field is still quite open for additional contributions. For example, these tools would benefit from further expan-sion towards data-driven models beyond the simpler static relationships already incorporated. From an implementation perspective, greater adoption of the toolbox is highly desired, along with contributions from other researchers that add to the existing component and system models as well as new ways to compose, decompose, and recompose systems efficiently. In addition to expanding capability and the user base, future goals would include larger-scale case studies on industrial MBSE. This incorporates the open problem of streamlining the co-design problems for which these tools are well suited. Co-design demonstrations to date have focused on subsystems; in the future it would be valuable to examine a full system, such as a vehicle, with hundreds or thousands of dynamic states. At present, the use of existing optimiza-tion tools with the graph-based representations encounters a challenge in scaling the state dimension. In much the same manner that controllers can exploit the structure uncovered through graph analysis, optimization approaches could also be tailored to exploit structure and lead to significantly greater numerical efficiency. The authors hope that this tutorial paper, along with the available toolbox, will serve as an inflection point in the usage and contribution to the modeling and control engineering community. REFERENCES [1] E. A. Walters and S. Iden, “INVENT modeling, simulation, analysis and optimization,” in 48th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting , (Or-lando, Florida, USA), pp. 1–11, Jan. 2010. [2] J. Doty, K. Yerkes, L. Byrd, J. Murthy, A. Alleyne, M. Wolff, S. Heister, and T. S. Fisher, “Dynamic thermal management for aerospace technology: Review and outlook,” Journal of Thermophysics and Heat Transfer , vol. 31, pp. 86–98, Jan. 2017. [3] A. G. Alleyne and C. T. Aksland, “Control as an enabler for electrified mobility,” Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems , vol. 5, pp. 659–688, May 2022. [4] J. T. Wen and S. Mishra, eds., Intelligent Building Control Systems .Springer, 2018. [5] P. J. Gawthrop and G. P. Bevan, “Bond-graph modeling,” IEEE Control Systems Magazine , vol. 27, pp. 24–45, Apr. 2007. [6] A. van der Schaft and D. Jeltsema, “Port-Hamiltonian systems theory: An introductory overview,” Foundations and Trends in Systems and Control , vol. 1, pp. 173–378, Jun. 2014. [7] P. Fritzson and P. Bunus, “Modelica-a general object-oriented language for continuous and discrete-event system modeling and simulation,” 

Proceedings of the 35th Annual Simulation Symposium , pp. 365–380, Apr. 2002. [8] The MathWorks Inc., “MATLAB version: 25.1.0 (2025a),” 2025. [9] J. P. Koeln, M. A. Williams, H. C. Pangborn, and A. G. Alleyne, “Experimental validation of graph-based modeling for thermal fluid power flow systems,” in Dynamic Systems and Control Conference ,(Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA), Oct. 2016. [10] D. J. Docimo, Z. Kang, K. A. James, and A. G. Alleyne, “A novel framework for simultaneous topology and sizing optimization of complex, multi-domain systems-of-systems,” Journal of Mechanical Design , vol. 142, Sep. 2020. [11] A. F. Thompson, A. J. Iezzi, H. C. Pangborn, R. K. Madabhushi, and O. V. Atassi, “Combined design and open-loop control optimization for propulsion, power, and thermal management of hybrid-electric aircraft,” in 2023 IEEE Conference on Control Technology and Ap-plications (CCTA) , (Bridgetown, Barbados), pp. 955–962, Aug. 2023. [12] M. A. Williams, J. P. Koeln, H. C. Pangborn, and A. G. Alleyne, “Dynamical graph models of aircraft electrical, thermal, and turboma-chinery components,” Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control , vol. 140, Apr. 2017. [13] D. J. Docimo and A. G. Alleyne, “Electro-thermal graph-based mod-eling for hierarchical control with application to an electric vehicle,” in IEEE Conference on Control Technology and Applications (CCTA) ,(Copenhagen, Denmark), pp. 812–819, Aug. 2018. [14] C. Laird, Z. Kang, K. A. James, and A. G. Alleyne, “Framework for integrated plant and control optimization of electro-thermal systems: An energy storage system case study,” Energy , vol. 258, Nov. 2022. [15] C. Laird, D. Docimo, C. T. Aksland, and A. G. Alleyne, “Graph-based design and control optimization of a hybrid electrical energy storage system,” in ASME 2020 Dynamic Systems and Control Conference ,(Virtual, Online), Oct. 2020. [16] C. T. Aksland, T. W. Bixel, L. C. Raymond, M. A. Rottmayer, and A. G. Alleyne, “Graph-based electro-mechanical modeling of a hybrid unmanned aerial vehicle for real-time applications,” in 2019 American Control Conference (ACC) , (Philadelphia, PA, USA), pp. 4253–4259, July 2019. [17] Y. Yu, S. Park, D. Huang, and H. Pangborn, “Graph-based hierarchical control of electrified aircraft systems with automated timescale decom-position,” in AIAA AVIATION 2023 Forum , (San Diego, CA, USA), June 2023. [18] J. P. Koeln, H. C. Pangborn, M. A. Williams, M. L. Kawamura, and A. G. Alleyne, “Hierarchical control of aircraft electro-thermal systems,” IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology , vol. 28, pp. 1218–1232, July 2020. [19] M. A. Williams, J. P. Koeln, and A. G. Alleyne, “Hierarchical control of multi-domain power flow in mobile systems: Part II aircraft application,” in Dynamic Systems and Control Conference , (Columbus, OH, USA), Oct. 2015. [20] C. T. Aksland and A. G. Alleyne, “Hierarchical model-based predictive controller for a hybrid uav powertrain,” Control Engineering Practice ,vol. 115, p. 104883, Oct. 2021. [21] C. T. Aksland, P. J. Tannous, M. J. Wagenmaker, H. C. Pangborn, and A. G. Alleyne, “Hierarchical predictive control of an unmanned aerial vehicle integrated power, propulsion, and thermal management system,” IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology , vol. 31, pp. 1280–1295, May 2023. [22] S. Yang, M. B. Chagas, and J. C. Ordonez, “Modeling, cross-validation, and optimization of a shipboard integrated energy system cooling network,” Applied Thermal Engineering , vol. 145, pp. 516– 527, Dec. 2018. [23] D. J. Docimo, Z. Kang, K. A. James, and A. G. Alleyne, “Plant and controller optimization for power and energy systems with model predictive control,” Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control , vol. 143, Aug. 2021. [24] F. Belkacem, H. Schäfer, T. Hellberg, and M. Meywerk, “Topology and sizing optimization of thermal and electric energy systems for battery electric vehicle,” in 2025 FKFS Conference on Vehicle Aerodynamics and Thermal Management , (Leinfelden-Echterdingen, Germany), Oct. 2025. [25] D. J. Docimo, “A design framework with embedded hierarchical con-trol architecture optimization,” in 2022 American Control Conference (ACC) , (Atlanta, GA, USA), pp. 3184–3191, June 2022. [26] P. J. Tannous, D. J. Docimo, H. C. Pangborn, and A. G. Alleyne, “Hi-erarchical estimation for complex multi-domain dynamical systems,” in 2019 Annual American Control Conference (ACC) , (Philadelphia, PA, USA), July 2019. [27] A. Bolander, T. Bird, W. A. Malatesta, K. McCarthy, and N. Jain, “A multi-state graph-based framework for dynamic modeling of turboma-chinery components,” in AIAA SCITECH 2024 Forum , (Orlando, FL, USA), Jan. 2024. [28] R. D. Smith and A. G. Alleyne, “Dynamical graph-based models of brayton cycle systems,” in 2022 American Control Conference (ACC) ,(Atlanta, GA, USA), pp. 4802–4807, June 2022. [29] C. T. Aksland, J. P. Koeln, and A. G. Alleyne, “A graph-based approach for dynamic compressor modeling in vapor compression systems,” in ASME 2017 Dynamic Systems and Control Conference ,(Tysons, VA, USA), Oct. 2017. [30] A. Bolander, T. J. Bird, R. Manion, M. Glebocki, K. McCarthy, and N. Jain, “A second law approach to dynamic optimization of enumerated aircraft thermal management system architectures,” IEEE Transactions on Transportation Electrification , vol. 11, pp. 12657– 12666, Oct. 2025. [31] C. T. Aksland and A. G. Alleyne, “An approach to simultaneous topology, parametric, and feedback control co-design: Applications to conservation-based energy systems,” IEEE Control Systems Magazine ,vol. 45, pp. 28–55, Jun. 2025. [32] Z. Echreshavi, E. Sisti, M. F. Palangari, R. Carli, and M. Rampazzo, “Control-oriented graph-based modelling of building energy system: a conservation-based framework for multi-zone buildings,” in 5th REHVA HVAC World Congress - CLIMA 2025 , (Milan, Italy), pp. 137– 147, June 2025. [33] K. R. Smith and A. G. Alleyne, “Decomposition-based control co-design of energy systems using graph models,” in 2025 American Control Conference (ACC) , (Denver, CO, USA), pp. 4743–4749, July 2025. [34] A. R. Manion, W. A. Malatesta, and N. Jain, “Development of a graph-based modeling framework for transient exergy analysis,” in 2022 21st IEEE Intersociety Conference on Thermal and Thermomechanical Phenomena in Electronic Systems (iTherm) , (San Diego, CA, USA), pp. 1–10, May 2022. [35] H. C. Pangborn, J. P. Koeln, M. A. Williams, and A. G. Alleyne, “Experimental validation of graph-based hierarchical control for ther-mal management,” Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control , vol. 140, Oct. 2018. [36] V. Vyas, N. Jain, K. McCarthy, and A. Bolander, “Graph-based dynamic modeling of a PAO loop for aircraft thermal management systems,” in AIAA SCITECH 2026 Forum , (Orlando, FL, USA), Jan. 2026. [37] K. M. Russell, C. T. Aksland, and A. G. Alleyne, “Graph-based dynamic modeling of two-phase heat exchangers in vapor compression systems,” International Journal of Refrigeration , vol. 137, pp. 244– 256, May 2022. [38] H. C. Pangborn, M. A. Williams, J. P. Koeln, and A. G. Alleyne, “Graph-based hierarchical control of thermal-fluid power flow sys-tems,” in 2017 American Control Conference (ACC) , (Seattle, WA, USA), pp. 2099–2105, May 2017. [39] M. Lionello, M. Rampazzo, A. Beghi, D. Varagnolo, and M. Vester-lund, “Graph-based modelling and simulation of liquid immersion cooling systems,” Energy , vol. 207, Sept. 2020. [40] H. C. Pangborn, C. E. Laird, and A. G. Alleyne, “Hierarchical hybrid MPC for management of distributed phase change thermal energy storage,” in 2020 American Control Conference (ACC) , (Denver, CO, USA), pp. 4147–4153, July 2020. [41] S. Park and H. C. Pangborn, “Lifted graph-based modeling for linear predictive control of nonlinear energy systems,” in IEEE Conference on Control Technology and Applications (CCTA) , (Bridgetown, Bar-bados), pp. 926–933, Aug. 2023. [42] E. Sisti, M. Rampazzo, and A. Beghi, “Modeling and simulation of vapor compression systems using a graph-based toolbox,” in Proceed-ings of the 15th REHVA HVAC World Congress - CLIMA 2025 , (Milan, Italy), pp. 1008–1017, June 2025. [43] S. R. T. Peddada, D. R. Herber, H. C. Pangborn, A. G. Alleyne, and J. T. Allison, “Optimal flow control and single split architecture ex-ploration for fluid-based thermal management,” Journal of Mechanical Design , vol. 141, p. 083401, Apr. 2019. [44] C. Ahn and J. Sun, “Control-oriented design framework for heat pump-based thermal management systems of electric vehicles,” Control Engineering Practice , vol. 172, July 2026. [45] P. J. Tannous and A. G. Alleyne, “Multilevel hierarchical estimation for thermal management systems of electrified vehicles with experimental validation,” Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control ,vol. 142, Nov. 2020. [46] S. R. T. Peddada, P. J. Tannous, A. G. Alleyne, and J. T. Allison, “Opti-mal sensor placement methods in active high power density electronic systems with experimental validation,” Journal of Mechanical Design ,vol. 142, Feb. 2020. [47] P. J. Tannous, S. R. Peddada, J. T. Allison, T. Foulkesc, R. C. Pilawa-Podgurskic, and A. G. Alleyne, “Model-based temperature estimation of power electronics systems,” Control Engineering Practice , vol. 85, Apr. 2019. [48] P. J. Tannous and A. G. Alleyne, “Fault detection and isolation for complex thermal management systems,” Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control , vol. 141, June 2019. [49] P. J. Tannous, S. R. T. Peddada, J. T. Allison, T. Foulkes, R. C. Pilawa-Podgurski, and A. G. Alleyne, “Dynamic temperature estimation of power electronics systems,” in 2017 American Control Conference (ACC) , (Seattle, WA, USA), May 2017. [50] S. R. T. Peddada, P. J. Tannous, A. G. Alleyne, and J. T. Allison, “Opti-mal sensor placement methods for active power electronic systems,” in 

ASME 2017 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference , (Cleve-land, Ohio, USA), Aug. 2017. [51] P. J. Tannous and A. G. Alleyne, “Multi-level hierarchical estimation for thermal management systems of electrified vehicles,” in ASME 2020 Dynamic Systems and Control Conference , (Virtual, Online), Oct. 2020. [52] P. J. Tannous, Estimation and Fault Diagnosis for Vehicle Energy Systems . PhD thesis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2020. [53] M. Shanks, U. Inyang-Udoh, and N. Jain, “Design and validation of a state-dependent riccati equation filter for state of charge estimation in a latent thermal storage device,” Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control , vol. 145, no. 9, p. 091002, 2023. [54] J. P. Koeln, M. A. Williams, and A. G. Alleyne, “Hierarchical control of multi-domain power flow in mobile systems: Part I framework development and demonstration,” in Dynamic Systems and Control Conference , (Columbus, OH, USA), Oct. 2015. [55] J. P. Koeln and A. G. Alleyne, “Robust hierarchical model predictive control of graph-based power flow systems,” Automatica , vol. 96, pp. 127–133, Oct. 2018. [56] J. P. Koeln and A. G. Alleyne, “Stability of decentralized model predictive control of graph-based power flow systems via passivity,” 

Automatica , vol. 82, pp. 29–34, Aug. 2017. [57] H. C. Pangborn, J. P. Koeln, and A. G. Alleyne, “Passivity and decentralized MPC of switched graph-based power flow systems,” in 

2018 Annual American Control Conference (ACC) , pp. 198–203, June 2018. [58] H. K. Khalil, Nonlinear systems . Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 2002. [59] H. C. Pangborn and A. G. Alleyne, “Cooperativity and hierarchi-cal MPC of state-constrained switched power flow systems,” in 

2019 American Control Conference (ACC) , (Philadelphia, PA, USA), pp. 4245–4252, July 2019. [60] H. C. Pangborn, Hierarchical Control for Multi-Domain Coordination of Vehicle Energy Systems with Switched Dynamics . PhD thesis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2019. [61] D. Angeli and E. D. Sontag, “Monotone Control Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , vol. 48, no. 10, pp. 1684–1698, 2003. [62] Y. Yu, D. Huang, S. Park, and H. C. Pangborn, “Learning networked dynamical system models with weak form and graph neural networks,” 

arXiv 2407.16779 , 2024. [63] H. C. Pangborn, J. E. Hey, T. O. Deppen, A. G. Alleyne, and T. S. Fisher, “Hardware-in-the-loop validation of advanced fuel thermal management control,” Journal of Thermophysics and Heat Transfer ,vol. 31, pp. 901–909, Oct. 2017. [64] M. Koot and F. Wijnhoven, “Usage impact on data center electric-ity needs: A system dynamic forecasting model,” Applied Energy ,vol. 291, June 2021. [65] T. R. Jahan, A. S. Ouedraogo, and D. J. Docimo, “A study on control co-design for optimizing microgrid sustainability,” IFAC-PapersOnLine , vol. 58, no. 28, pp. 636–641, 2024. [66] A. M. Gomez, J. Shaikh, and J. P. Koeln, “Improved mass conservation of control-oriented models of two-phase thermal systems using neural networks,” in 2025 American Control Conference (ACC) , (Denver, CO, USA), July 2025.