Title: Scalable Production Scheduling: Linear Complexity via Unified Homogeneous Graphs

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.23841v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Apr 2026 01:14:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Scalable Production Scheduling: Linear Complexity via Unified Homogeneous Graphs 

Jonathan Hoss 1, Moritz Link 1 and Noah Klarmann 1

Abstract — Efficiently solving the Job Shop Scheduling Prob-lem in real-world industrial applications requires policies that are both computationally lean and topologically robust. While Reinforcement Learning has shown potential in automating dispatching rules, existing models often struggle with a scal-ability bottleneck caused by quadratic graph complexity or the architectural overhead of heterogeneous layers. We intro-duce a unified graph framework that employs feature-based homogenization to project distinct node roles into a shared latent space. This allows a standard homogeneous Graph Isomorphism Network to capture complex resource contention with linear complexity, ensuring low-latency inference for large-scale industrial applications. Our empirical results demonstrate that our framework achieves state-of-the-art performance while exhibiting consistent zero-shot generalization. We identify the job-to-machine ratio as the primary driver of policy effective-ness, rather than absolute problem size. Based on this, we propose a hypothesis of structural saturation, demonstrating that policies trained on critically congested instances ( J ≈ M )learn scale-invariant resolution strategies. Agents trained at this saturation point internalize invariant conflict-resolution logic, allowing them to treat massive rectangular instances as a sequential concatenation of saturated sub-problems. This ap-proach eliminates the need for expensive scale-specific retrain-ing and prevents overfitting to statistical shortcuts, providing a robust and efficient pathway for deploying RL solutions in dynamic production environments. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

The Job Shop Scheduling Problem (JSSP) remains acornerstone challenge in operations research and combina-torial optimization, representing the optimal allocation of shared resources within strictly constrained environments. In industrial execution, scheduling is not a static combinatorial optimization problem, but a dynamic control problem char-acterized by strict causality: decisions taken at time t are irrevocable and must adapt continuously to evolving shop floor conditions. While exact optimization methods guarantee optimal schedules, their computational complexity grows exponentially with problem size, rendering them unsuitable for online application in large-scale production environments. Therefore, industrial practice is currently dominated by Priority Dispatching Rules (PDRs), which satisfy stringent latency constraints. However, these heuristics are inherently myopic and static, limiting their ability to react to dynamic bottlenecks and complex downstream interactions. Reinforcement Learning (RL) provides a means to bridge the gap between simple, fast heuristics and the need for adaptive, foresighted scheduling policies by learning directly from interaction with the evolving shop floor state. However,          

> *The work has been performed in the Cynergy4MIE project (GA. 101140226)

a central challenge in the industrial application of RL lies in the ability to deploy learned policies beyond their training distribution, as production systems vary widely in size, topology, and resource configuration. Drawing on the principle of making ”infinite use of finite means”, Battaglia et al. [1] argue that achieving such human-like combinatorial generalization requires architectures with strong relational inductive biases. These biases enable the systematic reuse of learned computations across varying structures, rather than memorization of specific configura-tions. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) naturally provide this property, as their functions are shared and reused across all nodes and edges, allowing policies to generalize systemati-cally to unseen topologies. The JSSP can be fully represented using the disjunctive graph formulation, which models machine contention by connecting every operation to all other operations on the same machine. While the JSSP becomes solvable within this representation by directing these machine constraint edges, this formulation creates dense cliques with quadratic edge complexity. As problem size increases, the resulting message-passing cost grows rapidly, creating a severe com-putational bottleneck that hinders scalability and practical application. Recent strategies have adopted heterogeneous graph rep-resentations to explicitly model resource constraints, suc-cessfully reducing structural density. However, this shifts the complexity from the data to the architecture: these models require separate parameters for different entity types. This ar-chitectural overhead increases memory footprint and creates inference latency, effectively replacing a graph scalability bottleneck with a model efficiency bottleneck. In this work, we propose a unified graph framework that retains the benefits of a heterogeneous graph representation while eliminating the computational overhead of heteroge-neous layers. We model the shop floor as a sparse het-erogeneous graph to efficiently capture resource contention, but employ a strategy of feature-based homogenization. By projecting distinct node roles into a unified feature space, we enable a standard homogeneous GNN to process the structurally heterogeneous graph. This effectively resolves the trade-off between representational fidelity and computa-tional efficiency and enables scalable policy learning with strong relational inductive biases. Our core contributions are as follows:  

> •

Linear-Complexity Unified Graph: We introduce a unified graph representation that models machines as first-class entities and captures machine–operation inter-

> arXiv:2604.23841v1 [cs.LG] 26 Apr 2026

actions via a sparse bipartite structure, reducing dense disjunctive cliques to linear complexity and enabling scalable online inference for industrial application.  

> •

Feature-Based Homogenization: We propose afeature-based homogenization strategy that embeds het-erogeneous node roles into a shared latent space, allow-ing the use of a standard homogeneous Graph Isomor-phism Network (GIN) without heterogeneous layers or type-specific parameters.  

> •

Structural Saturation Hypothesis: We identify a crit-ical problem scale at which congestion patterns in JSSP instances become fully developed and structurally stable and show that training at this scale induces scale-invariant scheduling behavior.  

> •

Industrial-Scale Zero-Shot Generalization: We demonstrate that a single policy trained at the structural saturation point generalizes in a zero-shot manner across problem sizes, eliminating the need for size-specific retraining and satisfying key industrial constraints on scalability and deployment. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Reinforcement Learning for Scheduling 

In the context of JSSP, Reinforcement Learning typically formulates scheduling as a constructive process. Starting from an empty schedule, an agent sequentially selects op-erations to assign to machines, allowing the policy to adapt to the dynamic state st without requiring a full recalculation of the schedule. A primary distinction in the literature lies in how this system state is represented to the learning agent, broadly dividing approaches into fixed-dimensional and graph-based architectures. 

Fixed-Dimensional Representations: A foundational line of research formulates the scheduling state using Euclidean architectures, differing primarily in how domain knowledge is encoded. Tassel et al. [2] relied on explicit feature engineering, utilizing domain expertise to manually cal-culate high-level attributes for processing by Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs). In contrast, Qiao et al. [3] focused on structural representation, organizing JSSP problem instances into multi-channel image-like tensors. This formulation al-lows Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to implicitly extract relational patterns via spatial filters. Despite these methodological differences, both streams face a representa-tion bottleneck: they rely on input representations with fixed dimensionality, requiring zero-padding or retraining to han-dle varying instance sizes. This structural rigidity effectively precludes zero-shot generalization to unseen problem scales. 

Graph Representations: To enable size-agnostic reason-ing, state-of-the-art methods have adopted GNNs. These architectures utilize topological state representations that allow policies trained on small instances to transfer to larger problems. Zhang et al. [4] proposed the ”Learning to Dispatch” framework, which reduces the computational burden of full disjunctive cliques by using a dynamic graph representation. In this formulation, machine edges connect only operations currently scheduled or immediately eligible. While this limits complexity, it also restricts explicit reason-ing about the waiting queue topology, as future contention is not structurally encoded. Moreover, the state transitions allow retroactive operation insertions, enabling previously made dispatching decisions to be altered. Although sufficient for offline schedule generation, this property precludes ap-plication in online or dynamic settings where past decisions must remain fixed. In contrast, Park et al. [5] retained the complete disjunc-tive graph representation to capture full global dependen-cies. While effective on smaller benchmarks, they explicitly acknowledge that the resulting quadratic edge complexity causes computational costs to rise rapidly with the number of operations, limiting scalability for large-scale instances. 

Explicit Resource Modeling and Heterogeneity: To address the topological inefficiency of disjunctive graphs, re-cent research has shifted toward explicit resource modeling, where machines are instantiated as distinct nodes within the graph. This evolution has been largely driven by the routing complexities of the Flexible JSSP. Approaches such as those by Song et al. [6] and Wang et al. [7] utilize heterogeneous GNNs to capture operation-machine interactions, relying on disjoint parameter sets to process the distinct node types. Similarly, Hameed and Schwung [8] model the shop floor as a bipartite graph. Their framework assigns a learning agent to each individual machine. This introduces multi-agent coordination overhead as it decomposes the problem into decentralized local optimizations. Critically, these methods often combine structural hetero-geneity with architectural heterogeneity. Using specialized heterogeneous GNNs necessitates separate weight matrices for each edge type, substantially increasing learnable param-eters and computational overhead. Our work seeks to de-couple this relationship: we leverage explicit resource nodes for their sparse linear topology, but process the graph with a unified, homogeneous backbone. Aligning with findings by Wang et al. [9] on the expressivity of homogeneous GNNs, we aim to achieve superior scalability without the computational burden of heterogeneous architectures. III. P RELIMINARIES 

A. Job Shop Scheduling Problem 

The JSSP involves scheduling a set of jobs J on a set of machines M. Each job Jj consists of a sequence of operations (Oj, 1, . . . , O j,M ), where each operation Oj,k 

is processed on a predefined machine mj,k for a specific duration pj,k . A valid schedule must satisfy two conditions: (1) precedence constraints, requiring Sj,k +1 ≥ Sj,k + pj,k ,where Sj,k is the start time; and (2) resource constraints, ensuring that for any two operations assigned to the same machine, their processing intervals are disjoint. The objective is to minimize the makespan Cmax , defined as the completion time of the last operation across all jobs: 

Cmax = max  

> j∈J

(Sj,M + pj,M ) (1) B. Reinforcement Learning 

RL is a computational approach to learning through in-teraction to achieve a goal. As defined by Sutton and Barto [10], the problem is modeled as an agent interacting with an environment over discrete time steps t. At each step, the agent observes a state st ∈ S , selects an action at ∈ A (st),and receives a reward rt+1 ∈ R and the next state st+1 .The objective is to learn a policy π(a|s) that maximizes the expected return Gt = P∞ 

> k=0

γkrt+k+1 , the discounted sum of future rewards, where γ ∈ [0 , 1] is the discount factor. IV. M ETHOD 

This section details our framework for scalable JSSP scheduling. We first formalize the environment as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), followed by a heterogeneous graph representation to ensure linear topological complexity. We introduce feature-based homogenization to map diverse enti-ties into a unified space, enabling a computationally efficient neural architecture based on a homogeneous GIN. Finally, we implement an actor-critic framework trained via Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [11] to derive adaptive, scale-invariant scheduling policies. 

A. Markov Decision Process Formulation 

We formalize the constructive scheduling process as a finite-horizon MDP defined by the tuple (S, A, P, r, γ ), rep-resenting the state space, action space, transition dynamics, reward function, and discount factor, respectively. The state space S is represented by a sequence of directed heterogeneous graphs {Gt} that capture the spatial and temporal configuration of the shop floor. At each step, the agent selects an action at from the action space At = {Oj,k | Oj,k −1 ∈ C ∧ Oj,k /∈ C} , where C is the set of completed operations, ensuring that an operation only becomes eligible once its direct predecessor is finished. We employ action masking to restrict the policy’s output distribution to this dynamic set. The transition dynamics P are deterministic, where se-lecting an operation Oj,k sets its start time according to 

Sj,k = max( Cj,k −1, Avail (Mk)) . This assignment updates the machine’s availability and evolves the graph topology to activate the successor operation Oj,k +1 .The reward function r combines a sparse terminal signal with dense shaping. At the terminal state ( t = T ), the agent receives a sparse terminal reward based on the proximity of the achieved makespan to the theoretical lower bound ( LB ): 

rT = λterm · LB Cmax 

, (2) where λterm is a scaling factor. This term serves as the ground-truth objective, directly aligning the policy with global makespan minimization. The dense shaping reward is introduced to provide in-termediate feedback during schedule construction and to mitigate credit assignment challenges. This component is derived from the spread of operation-level completion lower bounds ( CLB ), where CLB (o, s t) denotes the theoretical   

> High Spread
> Time
> Machines
> Mean CLB Max CLB
> Spread
> Low Spread
> Time
> Machines
> Mean CLB Max CLB
> Spread

Fig. 1: Structural characteristics of schedule spread. High spread reflects unbalanced job progress, low spread denotes synchronized execution. earliest completion time of operation o, assuming no future resource contention. We define the spread as the imbalance between the maximum CLB (corresponding to the operation that would finish last) and the mean CLB over all operations in the schedule: Spread (st) = max 

> o∈V ops

CLB (o, s t)− 1

|V ops |

X

> o∈V ops

CLB (o, s t).

(3) As illustrated in Figure 1, a lower spread indicates a more synchronized progression of jobs, whereas a high spread signals that specific jobs are lagging behind, potentially creating future bottlenecks. The stepwise shaping reward is subsequently defined as the reduction in spread between consecutive states, 

rt = λshape 

 Spread (st) − Spread (st+1 ). (4) By rewarding the reduction of this metric, the agent is incentivized to maintain a balanced schedule, providing a local heuristic that accelerates convergence toward the global objective of makespan minimization. The theoretical foundation of our dense learning signal is grounded in potential-based reward shaping proposed by Ng et al. [12], ensuring that the additional feedback does not introduce unintended bias into the policy. Under this framework, a shaping reward F preserves the optimal policy of the original MDP if it can be expressed as a difference of potentials F (s, a, s ′) = γΦ( s′) − Φ( s).By defining a potential function over the state space as 

Φ( s) = −λshape · Spread (s) and assuming a discount factor 

γ ≈ 1 for the episodic construction, we ensure that our dense reward takes the form of a potential difference: 

rt = Φ( st+1 ) − Φ( st). (5) This formulation constitutes a necessary and sufficient con-dition for policy invariance, guaranteeing that any policy maximizing our shaped reward function remains optimal for the original sparse objective. Consequently, rt accelerates learning without introducing suboptimal cycles or altering the goal of makespan minimization. Empirically, we find this reward shaping approach to be decisive for scalability. While sparse rewards suffice for smaller problems, agents trained on instances of size 20 × 20 

and larger failed to converge without this dense signal, emphasizing its importance for effective credit assignment in larger state spaces. O1,1 O1,2 O1,3           

> O2,1O2,2O2,3
> SEM1 M2 M3 M2M1M3
> O1,2O1,1O1,3
> O2,2O2,1O2,3
> SE
> (a) disjunctive graph (b) proposed heterogeneous graph

Fig. 2: Comparison of graph representations. 

B. Heterogeneous Graph State Representation 

We formulate the state st as a heterogeneous graph 

Gt = ( V, E), where the node set V = Vops ∪ V mch is divided into operation nodes and machine nodes. Unlike the disjunctive graph shown in Figure 2(a), which models resource contention via dense cliques, our proposed heterogeneous graph in Figure 2(b) utilizes a sparse structure. Our formulation is defined by two edge types: precedence edges ( Eprec ) and assignment edges ( Eassign ). Precedence edges are directed links that connect consecutive opera-tions (oj,k , o j,k +1 ) to track job progress. Assignment edges are bidirectional links that connect each operation to its designated machine. These assignment edges establish a bipartite backbone between Vops and Vmch , enabling the propagation of contention information without the need for direct operation-to-operation conflict links. The primary motivation for this heterogeneous design is to address the computational challenge of edge density in graph-based scheduling. Traditional disjunctive graphs form cliques among operations assigned to the same machine, leading to quadratic edge scaling |E| ∼ N 2, where N denotes the total number of operations. In contrast, our approach treats machine nodes as information hubs. By decoupling direct operation-to-operation links, our structure ensures that each operation node o ∈ V ops maintains a bounded degree (deg (v) ≤ 3), consisting of one assignment edge and up to two precedence edges. Consequently, the total edge count grows linearly: 

|E| ≤ (N − |J | ) + 2 N = O(N ). (6) This linearization ensures that both the memory footprint and the computational complexity of the GNN scale linearly with problem size. This structural efficiency provides a significant advantage in industrial online scenarios, where real-time responsiveness to dynamic events is required and the computational budget for individual decision steps is strictly limited. Our linear structural complexity limits single-step inference time to 

O(N ), a significant reduction from the O(N 2) complexity of traditional approaches, maintaining computational feasibility as problem dimensions increase. 

C. Feature-Based Homogenization 

While our heterogeneous graph representation provides the advantage of linear scaling, it introduces the challenge of processing distinct node types with different feature spaces. To address this without the computational overhead TABLE I: Unified node feature vector xv ∈ R5                   

> idx semantics v∈ V ops v∈ V mch
> 1–2 node type [1 ,0] ⊤[0 ,1] ⊤
> 3norm. lower bound ˜CLB 0
> 4sched. status xmask 0
> 5progress ratio 0ρprog

of specialized message-passing layers (e.g., relational or heterogeneous GNNs), we employ a strategy of feature-based homogenization. This approach is motivated by recent find-ings by Wang et al. [9] that homogeneous GNN backbones possess adequate expressive power to handle heterogeneous structures if disparate node attributes are mapped into a unified latent space. We project both operation and machine nodes into a shared latent space, augmenting their raw features with type-specific indicators. Each node v is initialized with a composite feature vector xv that concatenates its dynamic state attributes ϕ(vt)

with a learnable one-hot type embedding etype :

xv = etype ∥ ϕ(vt) (7) This allows a single homogeneous GNN backbone to project entities into orthogonal subspaces, learning distinct processing logic for operations and machines within a unified parameter space. Detailed features are provided in Table I. By mapping all entities into this shared feature space, we treat the shop floor as a formally homogeneous graph 

G = ( V, E), where node-type distinctions are handled implic-itly via the learnable embeddings. On this representation, we employ a K-layer GIN [13]. Node embeddings are initialized as h(0)  

> v

= xv and updated via a multi-layer perceptron MLP (k):

h(k) 

> v

= MLP (k)

(1 + ϵ(k)) · h(k−1)  

> v

+ X 

> u∈N (v)

h(k−1) 

> u



(8) where ϵ(k) is a learnable scalar and N (v) denotes the set of neighbors within the sparse unified graph structure. By stacking K layers, the receptive field of each node expands to its K-hop neighborhood. For example, at K = 2 ,an operation node Oi,j integrates information not only from its direct machine but also from all competing operations as-signed to the same machine. This architecture enables multi-channel reasoning across three critical structural dimensions:  

> •

Intra-job precedence flow (Oj,k → Oj,k +1 ) propa-gates temporal information downstream through di-rected edges, allowing the network to update the fea-tures of all subsequent operations whenever a delay or completion occurs on a job’s critical path.  

> •

Resource contention aggregation ( O → M) utilizes machine nodes as information hubs that collect feature vectors from all assigned operations to quantify global resource demand and estimate potential shop floor con-gestion.  

> •

Resource-state feedback (M → O) completes the communication loop via bidirectional edges, ensuring that machine status and queue density are reflected back to waiting operations so the policy can account for real-time contention from competing jobs. To support both local decision-making and global state evaluation, the architecture produces two distinct levels of representation. We compute a global graph embedding hG

via sum-pooling over all final node embeddings: 

hG = READOUT 



{h(K) 

> v

| v ∈ V} 



= X

> v∈V

h(K) 

> v

(9) Unlike mean-pooling, sum-pooling preserves information about the total graph size. In the context of scheduling, this magnitude correlates with the number of pending operations and the remaining workload, providing a necessary global scale of the shop floor state. The framework yields a set of node-level embeddings {h(K) 

> v

} for local action selection and a single graph-level embedding hG for state-value estimation. 

D. Policy Optimization 

We employ an actor-critic framework trained via PPO, where the GIN backbone parameterizes both the policy 

πθ (at|st) and the critic Vϕ(st). The network bifurcates into two specialized heads that process the learned node embeddings h(K) 

> v

and the global graph embedding hG to capture multi-scale shop floor dynamics. The critic (Value Head) estimates the expected return 

V (st), representing the expected sum of discounted future rewards when starting from state st. This estimation is derived purely from the global graph state, providing a workload-aware baseline for advantage estimation: 

V (st) = MLP critic (hG) (10) The actor (policy head) computes action probabilities over the operation nodes Vops . To capture both local scheduling constraints and global bottlenecks, we concatenate each node’s local embedding with the broadcasted global context: 

zv = h(K) 

> v

∥ hG, ∀v ∈ V ops (11) By concatenating h(K) 

> v

with hG, we provide the actor with a relational anchor, allowing it to evaluate the importance of a local task relative to the total remaining work. These context-aware vectors are projected to logits lv = MLPactor (zv ). To enforce precedence constraints, we apply a dynamic action mask μt, where μt,v = 0 for feasible operations and −∞ 

otherwise. The final policy is computed as a masked softmax: 

πθ (at | st) = softmax (l + μt) (12) 

Algorithm 1 PPO training with heterogeneous graph embed-ding.                                                                                         

> 1: Input: distribution Dinst of |J | × |M| instances
> 2: Init: actor πθ, critic Vϕ, buffer B
> 3: for episode k= 1 . . . K do
> 4: sample instance I ∼ D inst ;s0←RESET (I)
> 5: t←0
> 6: while stis not terminal do
> 7: Gt←CONSTRUCT GRAPH (st)
> 8: Mt←GET ACTION MASK (st)
> 9: hv, h G←GIN θ(Gt)▷node & global embed.
> 10: vt←MLP ϕ(hG)▷critic value estimate
> 11: zv←[hv∥hG]▷actor context
> 12: πt←softmax (MLP θ(zv) + log Mt)
> 13: sample action at∼πt
> 14: st+1 , r t←STEP (st, a t)
> 15: store (st, a t, r t, v t,log πt(at)) in B
> 16: t←t+ 1
> 17: end while
> 18: compute GAE advantages ˆAtusing stored vt
> 19: update θ, ϕ via PPO clip loss on B
> 20: end for

The procedural execution is formalized in Algorithm 1. Parameters are optimized to maximize the PPO clipped objective: 

LCLIP (θ) = ˆEt

h

min 



rt(θ) ˆAt,

clip (rt(θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ) ˆAt

i (13) where rt(θ) is the probability ratio between the new and old policies. The term ˆAt = P∞

> k=0

(γλ )kδt+k denotes the Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE), which relies on the temporal difference error δt = rt + γV (st+1 ) − V (st).This objective ensures stable policy updates by restricting the ratio within a small interval [1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ], leveraging the workload-sensitive baseline from the critic to reduce variance across diverse JSSP instances. The end-to-end architecture summarized in Figure 3 illus-trates the complete data flow of the unified graph framework. First, the JSSP state is instantiated as a graph, after which heterogeneous features ϕ(o) and ϕ(m) are projected into a shared latent space via feature-based homogenization. The subsequent GIN backbone processes these embeddings over 

K message-passing steps to resolve structural dependencies. Finally, the signals split into the PPO heads: while the critic aggregates information globally via sum-pooling to evaluate the state, the actor maintains node-level granularity to make scheduling decisions. V. E XPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 

A. Experimental Setup 

We design our experimental evaluation to validate the general efficacy of our proposed unified graph framework and systematically investigate the zero-shot generalization capabilities of the learned policies. To investigate how the training distribution affects general-ization, we train multiple independent agents across a range of problem geometries J × M . Evaluation is conducted on O1     

> O2
> On
> M1
> M2
> O
> M
> ϕ(o)
> ϕ(m)
> GIN 1· · · GIN
> K
> local
> ∥
> act
> msk
> π
> Σ
> global
> crit  V
> hG
> 1. Graph State 2. Embed 3. Backbone 4. PPO Heads

Fig. 3: Architecture of the policy optimization network. We utilize a heterogeneous graph embedding followed by a homogeneous GIN backbone. The actor and critic heads share features but use distinct masking and pooling mechanisms. a comprehensive testbed of 1,820 instances covering diverse scales and configurations. For architectural baseline valida-tion, we utilize a collection of standard historical datasets, namely the Taillard [14] and Lawrence [15] benchmarks. We additionally introduce a custom synthetic suite designed to assess topological sensitivity, comprising 100 instances per configuration and spanning square geometries ( 5 × 5 to 

20 × 20 ) as well as highly congested rectangular layouts (10 × 5 up to 100 × 20 ) with systematically varied job-to-machine ratios. 

B. Implementation Details 

Our framework is implemented using PyTorch Geometric [16] and TorchRL [17]. To facilitate further research and reproducibility, we published the source code, training envi-ronments, and synthetic datasets at https://github.c om/proto-lab-ro/unified-graph-rl-jssp .We utilize a K = 3 layer GIN backbone with node features normalized by the estimated instance horizon to ensure numerical stability. To maintain consistent gradient variance across varying problem scales, we employ a dynamic rollout batch size proportional to the total number of operations. Training is performed using the Adam optimizer with a linear decaying learning rate. Comprehensive hyperparameters and architectural dimensions are provided in Table II. TABLE II: Hyperparameter configuration                         

> Parameter Value
> Optimization (PPO)
> Learning Rate 3×10 −4(Linear Decay) Batch Size 4×(|J | × |M| )transitions Discount / GAE γ= 1 .0, λ = 1 .0
> Coefficients Clip ϵ= 0 .2, c ent = 0 .01
> Architecture
> Backbone GIN ( K= 3 , d hidden = 64 )Policy / Value Head MLP ( 64 →64 →1, Tanh)

C. Comparative Performance Analysis 

To establish a baseline, we benchmark against established PDRs, including Most Work Remaining (MWKR), Most Operations Remaining (MOR), and Flow Due Date / Most Work Remaining (FDD/MWR), as well as the state-of-the-art RL framework by Zhang et al. [4]. Other recent works, such as Hameed and Schwung [8] and Tassel et al. [2], are excluded due to incompatible decentralized or instance-specific training protocols. Table III summarizes results on the Taillard benchmarks and our synthetic validation set. Our composite configura-tion, which selects the best size-specific agent per geometry, denoted as Ours (comp) , consistently outperforms all PDRs and also surpasses Zhang et al. Notably, we observe that even a model trained on only a single geometry ( 20 × 20 ), denoted as Ours (single) , already outperforms the PDRs and achieves parity with Zhang et al. These results demonstrate that our architecture captures the structural features required for state-of-the-art performance. 

D. Scalability and Zero-Shot Transfer 

Beyond predictive performance, practical deployment in industrial environments requires scalable computational ef-fort. Owing to its unified graph representation, our approach inherently achieves linear scaling with problem size, making it computationally tractable as instance dimensions grow. Furthermore, in dynamic real-world settings, the ability to operate without retraining when instance dimensions change provides an additional practical advantage. We therefore evaluate zero-shot transfer as a measure of cross-scale adapt-ability. For this analysis, we benchmark our most robust generalist model, Ours (single), against PDRs, which remain the indus-try standard due to their size-agnostic and deployment-ready nature. We do not include Zhang et al. [4] in this setting, as their approach relies on geometry-specific training and was not designed for fully online, scale-agnostic application. The primary metric is the optimality gap, measuring deviation from the best-known lower bound. As shown in Figure 4a, Ours (single) consistently outperforms standard PDRs such as MWKR and MOR. While these simple rules exhibit high variance, the more sophisticated FDD/MWR rule [18] provides a stable baseline that matches our model on smaller instances. However, Figure 4b reveals a divergence in scalability. As problem sizes increase toward 100 × 20 , our policy achieves a notably lower median optimality gap and reduced variance compared to FDD/MWR. This confirms that the relative ad-vantage of our framework over PDRs grows with the problem scale. While fixed-priority heuristics rely on local decision rules, our unified graph architecture disentangles schedul-ing logic from global problem size, allowing the agent to TABLE III: Comparison of average makespan on synthetic and standard benchmarks. Data is reported as mean ± std. dev. Best non-reference results are bolded .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

> Instance Size MWKR MOR FDD /MWR Zhang et al. [4] Ours (comp) Ours (single)
> Synthetic Validation Set with 100 Instances per Size
> 6×6653 .8±80 .7611 .7±70 .4591 .5±62 .8574 .09 533.5 ±50.3 585 .1±66 .310 ×10 1192 .6±120 .91086 .5±103 .01031 .3±85 .5988 .58 949.2 ±75.8 1008 .0±90 .815 ×15 1866 .9±150 .41691 .1±116 .71563 .3±101 .71504 .79 1464.0 ±85.1 1516 .5±98 .120 ×20 2555 .0±169 .02298 .4±147 .02093 .3±111 .72007 .76 1987.8 ±90.3 2079 .7±115 .730 ×20 3286 .6±200 .82918 .5±175 .42684 .1±124 .12508.27 2512 .4±107 .32652 .2±143 .7
> Taillard Benchmark [14]
> 15 ×15 1896 .1±107 .81735 .7±88 .21577 .4±56 .81547 .41488.9 ±21.6 1538 .3±39 .720 ×15 2178 .9±116 .61998 .5±103 .41836 .7±96 .81774 .71755.4 ±70.8 1845 .2±93 .420 ×20 2633 .9±163 .02334 .8±102 .52164 .7±81 .12128 .12053.8 ±41.7 2156 .5±66 .030 ×15 2985 .9±216 .52567 .6±165 .12511 .2±151 .72378 .82289.1 ±82.8 2346 .5±120 .830 ×20 3265 .7±139 .93010 .4±139 .52726 .4±100 .82603 .92594.2 ±92.1 2756 .0±119 .850 ×15 4444 .9±290 .83714 .1±195 .33723 .7±169 .83393 .83349.3 ±136.3 3423 .3±159 .750 ×20 4677 .4±210 .54143 .6±232 .63845 .5±177 .03593 .93566.9 ±137.7 3730 .2±212 .9100 ×20 8040 .3±235 .46728 .8±307 .86837 .4±262 .16097.6 6263 .4±274 .86423 .0±261 .4
> Note: Zhang et al. and Ours (comp) employ shape-specific models tailored to the instance geometry. Ours (single) is a single generalist policy trained exclusively on 20 ×20 to evaluate zero-shot generalization across all scales.

leverage a global view of operation interdependencies. This advantage is particularly relevant for industrial applications, as the performance edge of our approach becomes most pronounced on the large-scale instances that characterize complex real-world production environments. 

E. Hypothesis of Structural Saturation 

Through the evaluation of agents trained on various ge-ometries across test scales from 5×5 to 100 ×20 , the 20 ×20 

configuration emerged as the most resilient generalist among the evaluated training geometries. As shown in Figure 5a, this agent consistently achieves the lowest average optimality gap across all instance shapes. Furthermore, Figure 5b confirms that its performance dominates across a vast job-to-machine ratio spectrum, outperforming agents trained on both smaller and larger geometries. As an explanation, we propose a hypothesis of structural saturation . This hypothesis is motivated by the easy-hard-easy phase transition in combinatorial optimization, where difficulty is driven by constraint density rather than absolute size. We argue that policy generalization is determined by the training instance topology rather than the absolute problem scale. We categorize this topology into three distinct regimes based on the job-to-machine ratio ( J /M): In the undersaturated regime ( J /M ≪ 1), sparse conflicts between jobs allow simple, myopic rules to succeed. Because agents trained in this setting face minimal penalties for sub-optimal decisions, they fail to internalize the robust conflict-resolution strategies or long-horizon logic required for more complex environments. As the system transitions into the saturated regime (J /M ≈ 1), it reaches the point of peak combinatorial hardness. As illustrated in Figure 5b, the optimality gap is generally higher here, indicating that these instances are the most challenging. This intense resource contention compels the agent to learn invariant scheduling principles that remain effective even when the problem scale increases. In contrast, the supersaturated regime ( J /M ≫ 1) be-haves increasingly like a stable queueing network. While the problem dimensions are large, the combinatorial difficulty actually decreases because high machine utilization becomes a sufficient condition for near-optimality. Agents trained ex-clusively in this regime may overfit to these flow-dominated dynamics, resulting in policies that lack the complex conflict-resolution logic needed to navigate the tighter constraints of quadratic benchmarks. Our results identify the 20 ×20 configuration as a structural saturation point within our benchmark suite. This implies that the agent treats massive rectangular instances, such as 

100 × 20 , as a sequential concatenation of saturated sub-problems. In an industrial context, this suggests that large-scale scheduling is best addressed by training at the satura-tion point rather than the target scale. This approach ensures policy robustness against high-contention scenarios while drastically reducing computational overhead by avoiding training on massive, yet combinatorically simpler, topologies. VI. C ONCLUSION 

We proposed a unified graph-based RL framework for the JSSP that achieves high-quality scheduling policies with linear computational complexity. By employing feature-based homogenization, our approach eliminates the over-head of heterogeneous layers while maintaining strong re-lational inductive biases. Experimental results demonstrate that our agent significantly outperforms traditional PDRs and achieves state-of-the-art performance on public benchmarks. Crucially, we identified a structural saturation point at the 

20 × 20 configuration, where the internal constraint density allows the agent to learn scale-invariant scheduling logic. This enables robust zero-shot generalization to industrial-scale instances such as 100 × 20 , effectively treating them as a concatenation of saturated sub-problems. By combining computational feasibility, low-latency on-line inference, and zero-shot generalization, our framework 0

> 0.25
> 0.5
> 0.75
> 1
> 1.2
> 1.5
> 1.8
> Optimality Gap (%)
> Random
> MWKR
> MOR
> FDD/MWR
> Ours (single)

(a) Performance across the test suite of 1,820 instances 20 ×15 

> 30 ×15
> 30 ×20
> 50 ×15
> 50 ×20
> 100 ×20

Problem Sizes (Jobs × Machines) 

> 0.2
> 0.4
> Optimality Gap (%)
> Ours (single)
> FDD/MWR

(b) Zero-shot scalability study on 100 instances per size 

Fig. 4: Size-agnostic performance comparison. satisfies the primary requirements for deployment in real-world industrial environments. Future work will extend this approach to stochastic settings with machine breakdowns and variable job arrival rates to further bridge the gap between theoretical optimization and dynamic industrial application. REFERENCES [1] P. W. Battaglia et al. , “Relational inductive biases, deep learning, and graph networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01261 , Oct. 2018. [2] P. Tassel, M. Gebser, and K. Schekotihin, “A reinforcement learning environment for job-shop scheduling,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.03760 , Apr. 2021. [3] D. Qiao, L. Duan, H. Li, and Y. Xiao, “Optimization of job shop scheduling problem based on deep reinforcement learning,” Evolu-tionary Intelligence , vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 371–383, Feb. 2024. [4] C. Zhang, W. Song, Z. Cao, J. Zhang, P. S. Tan, and C. Xu, “Learning to dispatch for job shop scheduling via deep reinforcement learning,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS) , 2020, pp. 1621–1632. [5] J. Park, J. Chun, S. H. Kim, Y. Kim, and J. Park, “Learning to schedule job-shop problems: Representation and policy learning using graph neural network and reinforcement learning,” International Journal of Production Research , vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 3360–3377, Jun. 2021. [6] W. Song, X. Chen, Q. Li, and Z. Cao, “Flexible job-shop scheduling via graph neural network and deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics , vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1600–1610, Feb. 2023. [7] R. Wang, G. Wang, J. Sun, F. Deng, and J. Chen, “Flexible job shop scheduling via dual attention network-based reinforcement learning,” 

IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 3091–3102, Mar. 2024. [8] M. S. A. Hameed and A. Schwung, “Graph neural networks-based scheduler for production planning problems using reinforcement learn-5×5

> 6×6
> 10 ×10
> 15 ×15
> 20 ×20
> 10 ×5
> 15 ×5
> 20 ×10
> 20 ×15
> 30 ×10
> 30 ×15
> 30 ×20
> 50 ×15
> 50 ×20
> 100 ×20

Problem Sizes (Jobs × Machines) 

20% 

40% 

60% 

> Optimality Gap (%)  20 ×20
> 25 ×25
> 30 ×20
> 10 ×10
> FDD/MWR
> High Ratio

(a) Performance by instance size and shape 1 2 3 4 5

Ratio (Jobs / Machines) 

20% 

40% 

60% 

> Optimality Gap (%)  20 ×20
> 25 ×25
> 30 ×20
> 10 ×10
> FDD/MWR
> High Ratio

(b) Performance by job-to-machine ratio 

Fig. 5: Impact of Training Topology on Generalization. 

ing,” Journal of Manufacturing Systems , vol. 69, pp. 91–102, Aug. 2023. [9] J. Wang, Y. Guo, L. Yang, and Y. Wang, “Enabling homogeneous GNNs to handle heterogeneous graphs via relation embedding,” IEEE Transactions on Big Data , vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 1697–1710, Dec. 2023. [10] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduc-tion , 2nd ed. The MIT Press, 2018. [11] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , Aug. 2017. [12] A. Y. Ng, D. Harada, and S. Russell, “Policy invariance under reward transformations: Theory and application to reward shaping,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML) , 1999, pp. 278–287. [13] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph neural networks?” in International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/for um?id=ryGs6iA5Km [14] E. Taillard, “Benchmarks for basic scheduling problems,” European Journal of Operational Research , vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 278–285, May 1993. [15] S. R. Lawrence, “Resource constrained project scheduling: An ex-perimental investigation of heuristic scheduling techniques,” Ph.D. dissertation, Graduate School of Industrial Administration, Carnegie Mellon University, 1984. [16] M. Fey and J. E. Lenssen, “Fast graph representation learning with PyTorch Geometric,” in ICLR Workshop on Representation Learning on Graphs and Manifolds , 2019. [17] A. Bou, M. Bettini, S. Dittert, V. Kumar, S. Sodhani, X. Yang, G. De Fabritiis, and V. Moens, “TorchRL: A data-driven decision-making library for PyTorch,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00577 , Nov. 2023. [18] V. Sels, N. Gheysen, and M. Vanhoucke, “A comparison of priority rules for the job shop scheduling problem under different flow time-and tardiness-related objective functions,” International Journal of Production Research , vol. 50, no. 15, pp. 4255–4270, Aug. 2012.