Title: Generative Design of a Gas Turbine Combustor Using Invertible Neural Networks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.24322v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Apr 2026 01:49:20 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# Patrick Krüger 1

Department of Mathematics, Technische Universität Berlin, Straße des 17. Juni 135, Berlin, Berlin, Germany email: krueger@math.tu-berlin.de 

# Hanno Gottschalk 

Department of Mathematics, Technische Universität Berlin, Straße des 17. Juni 135, Berlin, Berlin, Germany email: gottschalk@math.tu-berlin.de 

# Bastian Werdelmann 

Sienmens Energy, Rheinstraße 100, Mühlheim an der Ruhr, NRW, Germany email: bastian.werdelmann@siemens-energy.com 

# Werner Krebs 

Sienmens Energy, Rheinstraße 100, Mühlheim an der Ruhr, NRW, Germany email: wernerkrebs@siemens-energy.com 

# Generative Design of a Gas Turbine Combustor Using Invertible Neural Networks 

The need to burn 100% H 2 in high efficient gas turbines featuring low NO 𝑥 combustion in premix mode require the complete redesign of the combustion system to ensure stable operation without any flashback. Since all engine frames featuring a power range from 

4 MW up to 600 MW are affected, a huge design effort is expected. To reduce this effort, especially to transfer knowledge between the different engine classes, generative design methods using latest AI technology will provide promising potential. In this work, this challenge is approached utilizing the current advances in generative artificial intelligence. We train an Invertible Neural Network (INN) on an expandable database of geometrically parameterized combustor designs with simulated performance labels. Utilizing the INN in its inverse direction, multiple design proposals are generated which fulfill specified performance labels. Keywords: Combustors, Gas Turbines, Neural Networks 

1 Introduction 

Published version: This manuscript corresponds to the article published in ASME Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power , Vol. 147, Issue 1, 2025 DOI: 10.1115/1.4066294. 

In order to meet the Paris goal to limit the temperature rise be-low 2 K while approaching zero CO 2 emission, the power produc-tion has to undergo a significant transformation. In this context, Siemens Energy takes tremendous efforts in developing highly ef-ficient gas turbines such as the 9000HL [1] and new combustion systems that are capable of burning 100% H 2 [2]. Both efforts are a prerequisite for a stable and economic power generation while increasing the share of regenerative power which is known for its highly fluctuating production rate. Since the reactivity of the H2/air mixture will highly increase compared to the reactivity of CH 4/air mixture, a complete redesign of combustion systems of gas turbines of all sizes will be necessary [2]. This challenge is not easily met by conventional design proce-dures, where gas turbine components are designed and optimized by variation of design parameters and evaluated by numerical sim-ulation. ’Forward’ simulation assigns several performance labels to a given set of input parameters. This time-honored approach, however, requires re-iteration of simulation to conduct new param-eter searches whenever the requirements have changed. Often, the process is stopped when a single design meeting the requirements has been found. Rarely, any information is given about alternative designs. Manufacturing requirements usually being not considered at this stage of the process might later trigger a re-design. All this prolongs time to market in a highly dynamic period of transition. Negligence of data gathered in previous design efforts is another downside of traditional design methods. This changed with the arrival of surrogate models, which are widely used in gas turbine 

> 1Corresponding Author. Version 1.18, April 28, 2026

design since 2000. Based on machine learning, these models speed up the evaluation of configurations using data from previously con-ducted ’off-line’ simulations and thereby enable better design space exploration [3, 4]. Nevertheless, such supervised learning algo-rithms maintain the old logic of mapping design parameters to performance labels and therefore share many features of the tra-ditional design approach. Further speed up can be obtained by effective, low dimensional models that serve fast data production, e.g. in conjunction with multi-fidelity optimization [3, 5]. Generative learning emerged as a new paradigm of machine learn-ing around the middle of the last decade. While the public per-ceives generative learning through spectacular results in image and text generation, it has many features that are of interest in the context of design. While supervised learning usually processes a high dimensional input and predicts a few highly significant perfor-mance labels, promptable generative learning goes the other way round. On the basis of a rather low dimensional prompt, it gen-erates multiple high dimensional outputs associated to the given labels. It is therefore legitimate to consider this new class of machine learning algorithms as the inverse to ’forward’ supervised learn-ing or ’forward’ design. Admittedly, generative learning requires considerable amounts of data, but this, in company with foresight and planned design management, can be produced in ’off-line’ simulations. A continuous increase of the size of the simulation dataset allows training of generative models with increasing preci-sion that suggest design alternatives from requirements with almost no latency when used ’on-line’. This sharply distinguishes gener-ative methods from classical, simulation oriented inverse design [6]. Also, as multiple designs are created from one set of require-ments, manufacturing and cost can be considered in the final choice between feasible alternatives. A multitude of machine learning models is compatible with the above vision of generative design. Diffusion models emerged in 2015 [7, 8] and recently revolutionized image generation. However, the success of diffusion models is based on a very large dataset of 

Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power GTP-24-1269 / 1 

> arXiv:2604.24322v1 [cs.AI] 27 Apr 2026

pre-trained image encodings [9]. Conditional generative adversar-ial networks are successfully introduced for image generation [10] and for the simulation of turbulent flow [11, 12]. However, they are prone to mode collapse and poor coverage of all alternatives com-patible with a given prompt [13]. Normalizing flows, however, are known to be trainable on medium sized datasets and come with a good coverage. In this family belong neural ODE [14], affine cou-pling flows [15] and LU-Nets [16]. In particular, affine coupling flows have been suggested for usage of inverse design problems in [15]. In work presented in this publication, we apply the above outlined methodology to a generic configuration featuring typical gas tur-bine combustion items using affine coupling flow networks, specif-ically Invertible Neural Networks (INNs) as introduced in [15]. In particular, this study covers the following workflow, which is illus-trated in Fig. 1: 1) Create a training dataset featuring six independent geometri-cal parameters and three performance labels. The generation of the training dataset will be covered in Section 2. 2) Train an Invertible Neural Network (INN) on basis of the training dataset which may be augmented applying surrogate models. Theoretical foundations of INNs will be covered in Section 3, while the practical discussion of training, augmen-tation and model hyperparameters will be provided in Section 4. 3) Generate new designs for selected performance labels (Sec-tions 5.1 and 5.2). 4) Validate the generated designs to check the agreement with the prespecified performance labels in Section 5.3. This in-cludes a pre-validation via surrogate models and is concluded by cross-validating a selection of generated designs via Com-putational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) and acoustic network sim-ulation. 5) Comparison with a baseline based on Gaussian processes in Section 5.4. In Section 6, a conclusion and an outlook for future work are given.      

> Fig. 1 Generative design workflow. Table 1Independent parameters

x of the combustor dataset. 

Parameter Description Range 

𝑅 𝐴 

Ratio of free area at vortex gen-erators to cross sectional area of premixing tube 

[0.63 , 0.83 ]

𝑁 𝐻 Number of fuel injection holes on injection lance [2, 10 ]

𝐷 𝑀 Diameter of premixing tube in mm [20 , 45 ]

𝑅 𝐷 Ratio of diameter of lance to di-ameter of premixing tube [0.35 , 0.55 ]

𝑅 𝐿 Ratio of length of premixing tube to diameter of premixing tube [4, 12 ]

𝐿 𝑃 Length of combustor plenum in 

mm [200 , 900 ]

2 Dataset Generation 

This section describes the first part of the generative training work-flow, which is the creation of the dataset used to train the generative model. Each point [x, y] of the dataset is a realization of a param-eterized combustor geometry defined by independent parameters 

x, which will be discussed in Section 2.1. Each realization of the parameterization is then simulated via CFD and the reacting flow network tool GeneAC (General Network Application Code) [17] to obtain its corresponding performance labels y, which are intro-duced and motivated in Section 2.2. The details of the simulation models and the boundary conditions applied, as well as the defini-tions of the labels are discussed in Sections 2.3 and 2.4 for CFD and GeneAC, respectively. Finally, an overview over the resulting dataset is given in Section 2.5. 

2.1 Geometry and Parameters. A data point in the dataset rep-resents a realization of a parameterized combustor geometry. Com-pared to an actual combustor development, a strongly reduced number of independent design parameters is selected to enable a manageable amount of design points as well as the interpretation of results based on engineering judgement. The selection consists of parameters having a strong impact on the target labels and is based on combustion design experience. Furthermore, while re-lationships between independent parameters and target labels are still being tangible, they are ensured to be complex enough to demonstrate a satisfactory proof of concept for the generative de-sign approach. Each geometry consists of a combustor plenum, a premixing tube and a combustion chamber. Fuel is transported through a central fuel lance, which extends through the plenum and ends inside the premixing tube. Within the premixing tube, the lance holds several fuel holes as well as several vortex generators, which are introduced to enhance mixing. Figure 2 gives an overview of the geometrical setup. 

Independent Parameters. Each geometry itself is uniquely de-fined by a vector of six independent geometrical parameters x =

(𝑅 𝐴 , 𝑁 𝐻 , 𝐷 𝑀 , 𝑅 𝐷 , 𝑅 𝐿 , 𝐿 𝑃 ), where 𝐷 𝑀 , 𝑅 𝐿 and 𝑅 𝐴 are the pre-mixing tube’s diameter, length-to-diameter ratio and ratio of free area at the vortex generators to cross section area of the premixing tube, respectively. For the injection lance, 𝑅 𝐷 is the ratio between its diameter 𝐷 𝐿 and 𝐷 𝑀 . 𝑁 𝐻 is the number of injection holes. Finally, 𝐿 𝑃 is the length of the combustor plenum. An overview over x is given by Table 1. 

Dependent and Fixed Parameters. All other geometrical parame-ters are either fixed or derived from the independent parameters 

x. The relations between independent and dependent parameters as well as the values of fixed parameters have been chosen accord-ingly to avoid unreasonable combustor geometries. For instance, 

2 / GTP-24-1269 Transactions of the ASME Fig. 2 Overview of the parameterized combustor geometry defined by independent parameter vectors x.

the length of the premixing tube is defined by 𝐿 𝑀 = 𝑀 𝐷 · 𝑅 𝐿 .The diameter and length of the injection lance are derived by 

𝐷 𝐿 = 𝑅 𝐷 · 𝑀 𝐷 and 𝐿 𝐿 = 0.2 · 𝐿 𝑀 , respectively. The combus-tion chamber length and dump ratio are fixed at 𝐿 𝐶 = 1000 mm 

and 𝑅 𝐶 = 4, respectively. The dump ratio defines the diameter of the combustion chamber 𝐷 𝐶 . The number of vortex generators is set to be half of the number of injection holes, 𝑁 𝐻 , with a mini-mum of 2. Some geometrical parameters are also used to derive physical boundary conditions for the CFD simulation, which will be discussed in Section 2.3. 

2.2 Performance Labels. The performance labels y which have been selected to characterize the performance of designs are the pressure loss Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel , the unmixedness 𝑈 𝑀 at the premixing tube outlet and the thermoacoustic growth rate 𝐺 . The pressure loss in-fluences the gas turbine efficiency and the turbine cooling design, while the unmixedness impacts the NO 𝑥 emissions. Finally, the growth rate determines if the combustion system is thermoacous-tically stable. The methods which are applied to determine the performance labels are described in the following. 

2.3 CFD Simulation. In this section, the model setup and post processing of the CFD simulation are described, which is used to generate one part of the training dataset. Additionally, the labels 

yCFD extracted from the CFD simulations are introduced. 

CFD Model. The CFD simulations were performed using the Siemens Simcenter STAR-CCM+ software [18]. The simulation setup consists of a steady state, turbulent and reacting Reynolds Averaged Navier Stokes (RANS) model. The modeling of the tur-bulent internal flow is achieved through the 𝑘 -Omega-SST model and appropriate wall functions. The gaseous fuel/air mixture, where fuel is defined as methane (CH4), is treated as compress-ible using the ideal gas law. The turbulent Prandtl number 𝑃 𝑟 ,𝑡 

and turbulent Schmidt number 𝑆 𝑐,𝑡 , which are needed to describe the turbulent diffusion of gas species and heat, respectively, are selected as 𝑃 𝑟 ,𝑡 = 𝑆 𝑐,𝑡 = 0.4 in the bulk flow and are transitioned to 𝑃 𝑟 ,𝑡 = 𝑆 𝑐,𝑡 = 0.9 towards the walls within the near wall re-gion. Chemical reactions are modelled using a Flamelet Generated Manifold (FGM) model. The four-dimensional table consisting of mixture fraction and reaction progress variable as well as their variances was generated using the GRI3.0 mechanism. The FGM table is used to interpolate molecular fluid properties as well as the reaction rate. Turbulence effects on the reaction rate are modeled using assumed Beta PDFs for the mixture fraction and the reaction progress variable. 

Computational Mesh. The dominant cell type of the computational mesh is polyhedral. In the near wall region, five rows of prism lay-ers are introduced in order to enable a range of the dimensionless wall distance between 30 ≤ 𝑦 + ≤ 120 , which is in agreement to the requirements of the applied wall functions. The computational mesh features approximately 20 cells across the diameter of the premixing tube outlet. The same mesh resolution is applied in the flame region. Additional refinements are introduced in the vicinity of the fuel injection. Far upstream and downstream of the pre-mixing tube, the mesh resolution is coarsened. The applied mesh settings result in cell counts ranging from 4M to 6M cells. The variation is due to changes of the dimensions of the computational domain depending on the specific sets of design parameter val-ues being applied (e.g. length of premixing tube). Specifically, an increase of the fuel hole count increases the cell count, since many cells need to be applied in the fuel hole region to adequately resolve the fuel/air mixing process. 

Boundary Conditions. Solid walls are treated with no-slip and adi-abatic conditions. Additionally, the computational domain consists of two mass flow inlets, one for air and another one for fuel, as well as a pressure outlet. At the air inlet, the flow is characterized by a temperature 𝑇 𝐴 = 773 .15 K and a fuel mixture fraction 𝑍 𝐹 = 0.Since the created dataset contains cases with different premixing tube diameters, the air mass flow rate ̇ 𝑚 𝐴 varies depending on the considered geometry. In this context, a constraint 𝑉 𝑀 = 100 m s −1

was introduced on the bulk flow velocity 𝑉 𝑀 at the premixing tube outlet plane 𝑀 . Using this constraint, the required air mass flow rate ̇

𝑚 𝐴 = 𝑉 𝑀 · 𝜌 𝑀 · 𝐴 𝑀 (1) can be approximated from continuity, where 𝜌 𝑀 and 𝐴 𝑀 are the fluid density of the fuel/air mixture and the cross-sectional area at the premixing tube outlet, respectively. At the fuel inlet, the flow is characterized by a temperature 𝑇 𝐹 =

473 .15 K and a fuel mixture fraction 𝑍 𝐹 = 1. In order to set the fuel mass flow rate ̇ 𝑚 𝐹 , another constraint 𝑍 𝐹,𝑔 = 0.03 on the global fuel mixture fraction 𝑍 𝐹,𝑔 is introduced, which is defined by the mass flow balance of the domain: 

𝑍 𝐹,𝑔 =̇ 𝑚 𝐹 ̇

𝑚 𝐴 +̇ 𝑚 𝐹 

. (2) Accordingly, the fuel mass flow rate ̇ 𝑚 𝐹 imposed at the fuel inlet boundary can be derived: ̇

𝑚 𝐹 =̇ 𝑚 𝐴 · 𝑍 𝐹,𝑔 

1 − 𝑍 𝐹,𝑔 

. (3) At the pressure outlet of the computational domain, a static pressure of 𝑝 = 20 bar is imposed. 

Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power GTP-24-1269 / 3 Fig. 3 Top three charts: Normalized magnitude of flow velocity V, progress variable c and normalized deviation between local mixture fraction ZF and global mixture fraction ZF , g at the longitudinal x -y -plane of the geometry. Locations outside of the colorbar range are colored white. Bottom chart: Normalized difference between mass flow averaged total pressure ¯pt

and the corresponding value at the domain outlet ¯pt,O and fuel/air unmixedness U along the x -direction of the domain. 

Evaluation of an Exemplary Simulation. In the top three charts of Fig. 3, for an exemplary case, several flow quantities are depicted across the longitudinal 𝑥 -𝑦 -plane of the geometry. The coordinates 

𝑥 and 𝑦 are normalized by the premixing tube diameter 𝐷 𝑀 . From top to bottom, the magnitude ∥V∥ of the flow velocity V normal-ized by the premixing tube bulk flow velocity 𝑉 𝑀 , the reaction progress variable 𝑐 and the deviation of the local mixture fraction 

𝑍 𝐹 from the global mixture fraction 𝑍 𝐹,𝑔 normalized by 𝑍 𝐹,𝑔 are shown. The latter two quantities illustrate the reaction zone and the local mixing quality, respectively. The flow velocity is mod-erate at the inlet plenum and accelerates significantly at the entry of the premixing tube. Further downstream, the flow expands first at the end of the fuel lance and even stronger at the inlet to the combustion chamber (the dump section). At the latter location, as can be observed from the reaction progress variable field 𝑐 , the jet-type flame is stabilized, which is characterized by a flame length of approximately 4-5 times the premixing tube diameter 𝐷 𝑀 . The fuel injection is located at approximately two times the premix-ing tube diameter downstream of the premixing tube inlet. Within the region of approximately 1-2 times the premixing tube diameter downstream of the fuel injection, the deviation of mixture fraction from its global value is well above 50%. In radial direction of the premixing tube, fuel rich streaks can be observed, which clearly indicate the flow path of the fuel. The deviation of the local mix-ture fraction continuously decreases with increasing distance from the fuel injection location. In the bottom chart of Fig. 3, the evolution of the total pressure 

¯𝑝 𝑡 , mass flow averaged over the cross section at the respective 𝑥 -location, and the fuel/air unmixedness 𝑈 , also evaluated over the cross section at the respective 𝑥 -location, are illustrated for the same exemplary case along the 𝑥 -direction of the domain. The averaged total pressure ¯𝑝 𝑡 is represented by its deviation 

¯𝑝 𝑡 − ¯𝑝 𝑡 ,𝑂 

¯𝑝 𝑡 ,𝐼 

(4) from its corresponding value ¯𝑝 𝑡 ,𝑂 at the domain outlet and nor-malized by its corresponding value ¯𝑝 𝑡 ,𝐼 at the domain inlet, which illustrates the normalized total pressure loss from the respective 

𝑥 -location towards the domain outlet. In Fig. 3, it can be observed that the most significant part of the total pressure loss is attributed to losses due to the premixing tube inlet, the jet-in-cross-flow-type fuel injection and the expanding flow field at the dump section. The fuel/air unmixedness 𝑈 is a measure for the mixing quality and is defined as a normalized and mass flow rate weighted standard deviation 

𝑈 = 1

𝑍 𝐹,𝑔 

⌜⎷ ∫  

> 𝑆

(𝑍 𝐹 − 𝑍 𝐹,𝑔 )2 · 𝜌 V · dA

∫ 

> 𝑆

𝜌 V · dA (5) of the mixture fraction 𝑍 𝐹 at the surface cross-section 𝑆 at a spe-cific axial location 𝑥 . In accordance to the observations with re-gards to the mixture fraction field, the fuel/air unmixedness is char-acterized by large values in the vicinity of the fuel injection and a continuous decay with increasing distance measured from the fuel injection as can be observed in Fig. 3. 

Definition of Labels. One part of the labels y of the dataset is composed of the labels yCFD derived from the CFD simulations. The labels of interest are the normalized total pressure loss Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel 

between the air inlet and the outlet of the computational domain and the fuel/air unmixedness 𝑈 𝑀 at the premixing tube outlet plane. In accordance with Equation 4, the normalized total pressure loss 

Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel is defined as follows: 

Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel = ¯𝑝 𝑡 ,𝐼 − ¯𝑝 𝑡 ,𝑂 

¯𝑝 𝑡 ,𝐼 

. (6) In Equation 6, ¯𝑝 𝑡 ,𝑆 denotes the mass flow averaged total pressure across the inlet plane (𝑆 = 𝐼 ) and outlet plane (𝑆 = 𝑂 ) of the domain. The value of Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel is indicated in the bottom chart of Fig. 3 for the exemplary case as a blue circle. The fuel/air unmixedness 𝑈 𝑀 at the premixing tube outlet plane 𝑀 

is defined according to Equation 5, where the surface integration is conducted over the premixing tube outlet plane ( 𝑆 = 𝑀 ). The value of 𝑈 𝑀 is depicted in the bottom chart of Fig. 3 for the exemplary case as a red circle. Finally, the labels yCFD derived from the CFD simulations are obtained as follows: 

yCFD = [𝑈 𝑀 , Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel ]. (7) 

2.4 Acoustic Network Simulation. 

Model Setup. Thermoacoustic analysis of the generic combustion system is carried out using the reacting flow network tool GeneAC. GeneAC solves the linearized Euler equations for modelling the acoustic wave propagation [19]. The acoustic properties of the 

4 / GTP-24-1269 Transactions of the ASME different elements including the flame are represented by trans-fer matrices which relate the acoustic pressure and velocity at the downstream plane to the acoustic pressure and velocity at the up-stream plane of the element. Since a partially premixed jet flame is considered, equivalence ratio fluctuations and volume flow fluc-tuations excite the flame [20]. The flame transfer matrices for both volume flow fluctuations and equivalence ratio fluctuations are cal-culated by application of the 𝑛 − 𝜏 model. At the inlet, an open acoustic end is assumed, whereas the outlet is treated as a closed end. All transfer matrices of the individual elements are cast in a homogeneous matrix equation for which solutions are obtained for discrete complex eigenfrequencies Ω [17]. For the system with an acoustic open inlet and a closed outlet, two acoustic modes are found in the lower frequency range: The quarter wave mode with frequencies typically below 200 Hz and the three quarter wave mode characterized by frequencies above 200 Hz . The actual frequency of the different modes vary from case to case due to the variation in combustor plenum length and premixing tube length. The evolution plots of the normalized dynamic pressure amplitude for both modes are shown in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5. For both modes, the dynamic pressure amplitude approaches zero at the open inlet and approaches one at the closed outlet.   

> Fig. 4 Quarter wave mode (f= 86 Hz) of an exemplary simu-lation.
> Fig. 5 Three quarter wave mode (f= 204 Hz) of an exemplary simulation.

Definition of Labels. The thermoacoustic system stability is rep-resented by the thermoacoustic growth rate which results from a linear stability analysis [17]. The growth rate is defined as 

𝐺 = 𝐴 𝑖 +1

𝐴 𝑖 

− 1 = exp (︃ −2𝜋 𝜔 imag 

𝜔 real )︃ − 1 = yAC , (8) with the complex eigenfrequency defined as 

Ω = 𝜔 real + 𝑖 ∗ 𝜔 imag . (9) The growth rate G expresses the ratio between the amplitude 𝐴 of two sequential harmonic oscillations. It is derived from the com-plex eigenfrequency Ω as described above. A positive value of the growth rate results in a mode excitation in which the ampli-tude is continuously increasing with each cycle. A negative value relates to the damping of the mode. For the quarter wave mode, a systematic dependence of the growth rate on the input parame-ters has been found, whereas for the three quarter wave mode, the dependence of the growth rate on the input parameters showed a bigger variance. Hence, since the focus was set on qualifying the generative design methodology, only the growth rate of the quarter wave is further considered. 

2.5 Parameter and Label Space. With the methods outlined above, the dataset D was created by sampling 1295 independent parameter vectors 

x = [𝑅 𝐴 , 𝐷 𝑀 , 𝑁 𝐻 , 𝑅 𝐷 , 𝑅 𝐿 , 𝐿 𝑃 ]. (10) The corresponding labels y are composed of the labels yCFD and 

yAC obtained from the CFD and acoustic network simulations, re-spectively: 

y = [yCFD , yAC ] = [𝑈 𝑀 , Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel , 𝐺 ]. (11) Figure 6 provides an overview plot of all sampled parameters x

and obtained labels y.

Design Space and Sampling. Sampling of parameter vectors was conducted via the Latin Hypercube method [21] to ensure an even distribution of parameter values throughout the design space. The design space was defined by the minimum and maximum values for each independent parameter given in Table 1. 

Dataset Overview. A wide range of values for each label results for the sampled designs, which can be seen on the y-axis of Fig. 6. For Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel , strong positive and negative correlations to the ratio 

𝑅 𝐷 (between the diameters of the fuel lance and the premixing tube) and the ratio 𝑅 𝐴 (between the free cross sectional area at the vortex generators and the premixing tube outlet) are found, respec-tively. A large ratio of 𝑅 𝐷 represents a design with a comparably large lance diameter, which introduces a higher resistance to the flow. An inverse trend can be found for the ratio 𝑅 𝐴 . A high value of 𝑅 𝐴 represents a design with the lowest blockage by the vortex generators and, therefore, the associated pressure loss results are on the lower side. The unmixedness 𝑈 𝑀 is largely impacted by the amount of fuel holes 𝑁 𝐻 , where, except for 𝑁 𝐻 = 10 , the un-mixedness decreases with an increase in the amount of fuel holes, which significantly improves the circumferential distribution of the fuel within the premixing tube. A minimum of 𝑈 𝑀 is reached for 

𝑁 𝐻 = 8, which reveals a nonlinear relationship between 𝑁 𝐻 and 

𝑈 𝑀 . Additionally, the unmixedness decreases with increasing the length of the premixing tube, which provides obviously additional premixing length for the fuel/air mixture. The correlations between 

𝑈 𝑀 and the parameters 𝑅 𝐷 and 𝑅 𝐴 controlling the blockage of the flow by the fuel lance and the vortex generators, respectively, are inverted compared to the corresponding pressure loss correlations. This can be explained by increased velocities caused by an increase of the flow blockage, which enhances the shear layers and, hence, the production of turbulent kinetic energy. Therefore, a trade-off exists between pressure loss and unmixedness being controlled by the mentioned blockage parameters. Considering the growth rate 

𝐺 , no clear dependence was found on a single independent param-eter. Instead, it was found that mode excitation depends on a more complex combination of the parameters. For example, the ther-moacoustic growth rate depends on the convective time lag from fuel injection location to the flame front. Since the velocity in the premixing tube is kept constant, this value depends on the prod-uct of 𝐷 𝑀 and 𝑅 𝐿 . Increasing the plenum length will reduce the eigenfrequency of the quarter wave mode. Although the number of unstable configurations reduces with increasing 𝐿 𝑃 , a stability boundary which only depends on the plenum length could not be found. 

Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power GTP-24-1269 / 5 Fig. 6 Scatter plot of all data points of the combustor dataset D, displaying relationships between parameters x on the x-axis and labels y on the y-axis. The dashed horizontal line in the third row represents the boundary G = 0 of theromacoustic stability. 

3 Invertible Neural Neworks: Motivation and Theoretical Background 

Generative design methods ’generate’ new design parameter vec-tors x (Eq. 10) for a specified label vector y (Eq. 11): 

𝒢 : 𝑌 → 𝑋 : 𝑝 (x ∈ X|y). (12) Referring to Equation 12, a generative design method 𝒢 learns the conditional probability of design parameter vectors x ∈ X given a specified target label vector y ∈ Y. A common problem of gener-ative design methods is the dimensional difference between inputs and outputs. To illustrate this (Fig. 7), let X ⊆ R𝑃 and Y ⊆ R𝐿 

be the spaces of parameter and label vectors x and y, respectively. While the forward process 𝜙 : X → Y might be well understood or at least sufficiently easy to simulate, its loss of information makes it difficult to find a precise and descriptive model for the backward process 𝜙 −1 : Y → X. For instance, different parameter vectors 

x ∈ X might yield the same label vector y ∈ Y under 𝜙 (Fig. 7, left). A direct modeling approach for 𝜙 −1 yields either only one of the possible x, or returns an average of several x yielding y,which itself might be wrong given the hidden nonlinear nature of 𝜙 

(Fig. 7, center). Invertible Neural Networks (INNs) approach this problem by learning a bijective mapping 𝑓 : X ↔ [ Y, Z], where 

Z ⊆ R𝑃 −𝐿 follows a simple, easy to sample distribution 𝑝 Z ’filling up’ Y to match the dimension of X. 𝑓 then encodes information that would normally be lost in the forward process 𝜙 : X → Y in Z.This enables the simulation of 𝜙 −1 by running 𝑓 −1 for fixed target labels y ∈ Y and varying z ∈ Z to receive individual x yielding said y under 𝜙 (Fig. 7, right). While this work covers a relatively low dimensional example, flow based models have been success-fully applied to high dimensional datasets such as MNIST (628 dimensions) and CIFAR10 (1024 dimensions), for instance in [22] and [23]. INNs furthermore posses the universal approximation property for rather arbitrary bijective mappings. Thus, any such mapping can be approximated to arbitrary precision, see [24]. The trained INN is thus able to generate design alternatives of combustor geometries that yield specified performance values for the defined labels. The concept of INNs evolved from Normalizing Flows, which will be covered in Section 3.1. Afterwards, mathe-matical foundations of training as well as the special architecture of INNs will be discussed in Sections 3.2 and 3.3, respectively. 

3.1 Normalizing Flows. Normalizing flows are a set of gener-ative machine learning models that are able to learn probability distributions from given data with efficient sampling and density estimation. This is achieved by the network architecture being in-vertible, i.e. being able to be passed through forwards as well as backwards . This enables learning an invertible mapping be-tween a simple distribution (e.g. a standard Gaussian) and the estimated distribution of the given data. Let Z ⊆ R𝑑 be a set of 

𝑑 -dimensional random vectors z following a probability density function 𝑝 Z : R𝑑 → R that is known and easy to simulate. Let furthermore 𝑔 : R𝑑 → R𝑑 be an invertible and differentiable func-tion, let 𝑓 = 𝑔 −1 be its inverse and let X = 𝑔 (Z) the set of random vectors x = 𝑔 (z) obtained by transforming Z by 𝑔 . Then, one can use the change of variables formula (Eq. 13) to obtain the density function of X:

𝑝 X (x) = 𝑝 Z ( 𝑓 (x))| det D 𝑓 (x)| 

= 𝑝 Z ( 𝑓 (x))| det D 𝑔 ( 𝑓 (x))| −1.

(13) Here, D 𝑓 = 𝜕 𝑓 𝜕 z and D𝑔 = 𝜕𝑔 𝜕 x are the Jacobians of 𝑓 and 𝑔 = 𝑓 −1,respectively. In a generative learning setup, the function 𝑓 is realized as a parameterized mapping 𝑓 𝜃 : X → Z with learned parameters 

𝜃 on a dataset D = {x(𝑖 ) }𝑘 𝑖 =1 of samples from X. This direction of the normalizing flow is often called the normalizing direction 

as the complex and unknown density 𝑝 X is transformed into the simple density 𝑝 Z, which in most cases is just a multivariate standard normal distribution. To reach sufficient expressivity of the network, 𝑓 is set to be a composition 𝑓 = 𝑓 1 ◦ · · · ◦ 𝑓 𝑛 of individual invertible, differentiable functions 𝑓 𝑖 , 𝑖 ∈ { 1, · · · , 𝑛 }.

6 / GTP-24-1269 Transactions of the ASME Fig. 7 Different x can result in the same y (left), which leads to errors in direct backwards modeling (center). This is alleviated by introducing a latent variable z (right). 

The Jacobian determinant of this composition can then be calculated by 

det D 𝑓 (x) =

> 𝑛

∏︂ 

> 𝑖 =1

det D 𝑓 𝑖 (x𝑖 ), (14) where xi = 𝑓 𝑖 +1 ◦ · · · ◦ 𝑓 𝑛 (x) and thus x𝑛 = x. For efficient computation, the determinants of each D 𝑓 𝑖 need to be easy to compute. The most common way of achieving this is to design the functions 𝑓 𝑖 in such a way that their Jacobians are triangular matrices, which will be further covered in Section 3.3. The aforementioned tractabillity of the Jacobians now al-lows for likelihood based training and exact density estimation. Given a dataset D = {x(𝑖 ) }𝑘 𝑖 =1 sampled from X, one can then calculate the log-likelihood of D under 𝑓 𝜃 given the parameters 𝜃 

as 

log 𝑝 (D|𝜃 ) =

> 𝑘

∑︂ 

> 𝑖 =1

log 𝑝 X (x(𝑖 ) |𝜃 )

=

> 𝑘

∑︂ 

> 𝑖 =1

log 𝑝 Z ( 𝑓 (x(𝑖 ) |𝜃 ) + log |det D 𝑓 (x(𝑖 ) |𝜃 )| ,

(15) with |det D 𝑓 (x(𝑖 ) |𝜃 )| being calculated using Eq. 14. After the network has been trained using Eq. 15 or other sample-based loss functions described later, one can efficiently generate new samples following 𝑝 X of X by sampling from Z and applying 𝑓 −1 = 𝑔 .This is often called the generative direction of the normalizing flow. Normalizing flows have been shown to provide precise den-sity estimations, as well as rich and efficient sampling, for instance in [25] and [23]. A comprehensive review of current methods is furthermore provided by [26]. 

Fig. 8 Training process of an INN in both directions with relevant losses. 

3.2 INN: Training and Losses. As illustrated in Fig. 8, INNs evolve the core principles of normalizing flows in two main ways: First, the data distribution 𝑝 X of X is not only mapped to a latent distribution 𝑝 Z of Z. Instead, 𝑝 X is transformed into a combination of 𝑝 Z and another complex distribution 𝑝 Y of labels Y obtained from X. Furthermore, INNs are trained in the normalizing direc-tion, as well as in the generative direction in alternating fashion. Let D be a dataset consisting of parameter vectors x ∈ X ⊆ R𝑃 

and label vectors 𝜙 (x) = y ∈ Y ⊆ R𝐿 resulting from some physical process 𝜙 with 𝐿 < 𝑃 . In this work, D is the dataset obtained in Section 2, hence 𝑃 = 6 and 𝐿 = 3. Let furthermore X and Y follow complex distributions 𝑝 X and 𝑝 Y. The INN is then trained in both directions. In the normalizing direction, the forward process is approximated: 

[y, z] = 𝑓 (x, 𝜃 ) = [ 𝑓 y (x, 𝜃 ), 𝑓 z (x, 𝜃 )] . (16) Here, 𝑓 y (x, 𝜃 ) is trained to approximate the underlying process 𝜙 by predicting labels y = 𝜙 (x) for corresponding inputs x ∈ D, while 

𝑓 z (x, 𝜃 ) is trained to follow a (𝑃 − 𝐿 )-dimensional multivariate normal distribution 𝑝 Z = N(0, 1).To achieve both training objectives, a combination of a supervised loss Ly and an unsupervised loss Lz is used for 𝑓 y and 𝑓 z, respec-tively: 

Lforw = 𝜆 yLy ( 𝑓 y (x(𝑖 ) , 𝜃 ), y(𝑖 ) ) + 𝜆 z Lz ( 𝑓 z (x(𝑖 ) , 𝜃 ), z(𝑖 ) ), (17) where z(𝑖 ) are samples drawn from 𝑝 Z. The supervised loss func-tion used for Ly in this work is the mean squared error (MSE): 

MSE =∑︁  

> 𝑘 𝑖 =1

( 𝑓 y (x(𝑖 ) , 𝜃 ) − y(𝑖 ) )2

𝑘 . (18) For Lz, Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD, see [27]) was applied using the inverse multiquadratic kernel 

𝑘 (𝑥, 𝑥 ′) = 11+∥ ( 𝑥 −𝑥 ′ )/ ℎ∥ as in [15]. MMD calculates the difference between the respective estimated probability distributions of two sets of input samples. Minimizing Lz = MMD ( 𝑓 z (x(𝑖 ) , 𝜃 ), z(𝑖 ) )

thus maximizes the likelihood of 𝑓 z transforming 𝑝 X into 𝑝 Z.In the generative direction, the backward process 𝜙 −1 is trained by transforming label and noise vectors [y, z] into parameter vectors 

x yielding y under 𝜙 :

x = 𝑔 ([ y, z], 𝜃 ). (19) The loss function of the backward process Lrev is again real-ized by MMD, ensuring that the distribution of generated samples 

𝑔 ([ y, z], 𝜃 ) matches 𝑝 X:

Lrev = 𝜆 x Lx (𝑔 ([ y(𝑖 ) , z(𝑖 ) ], 𝜃 ), x(𝑖 ) )

= 𝜆 x (MMD (𝑔 ([ y(𝑖 ) , z(𝑖 ) ], 𝜃 ), x(𝑖 ) ).

(20) In Equations 17 and 20, scalar weights [𝜆 x, 𝜆 y, 𝜆 z] are introduced as hyperparameters. Depending on the application, they are adjusted 

Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power GTP-24-1269 / 7 Fig. 9 Illustration of operations performed by a coupling block in the forward (top) and backward (bottom) direction. 

to balance the different losses such that their values remain of the same order of magnitude during training. However, as only Lrev 

and Lforw = 𝜆 yLy + 𝜆 zLz are minimized during training, further experiments and tuning (see Section 4.1) showed that a higher relative weighting of Ly to Lz increased predictive and thus, by invertibilty, generative accuracy as long as 𝜆 z was kept just high enough to ensure that 𝑓 z (Eq. 16) follows the desired normal distribution. 

3.3 INN: Invertible Architecture. To achieve invertibility, INNs consist of concatenations of so-called coupling blocks (Fig. 9), which were first introduced by Dinh et al. [25]. Each coupling block itself consists of two affine coupling layers. The operations performed by a coupling block are as follows: First, the input x

is split into two halves u1 = x1: 𝑘 , u2 = x𝑘 +1: 𝑛 . The outputs of the coupling block are then computed as 

v1 = u1 · exp (𝑠 2 (u2)) + 𝑡 2 (u2),

v2 = u2 · exp (𝑠 1 (v1)) + 𝑡 1 (v1).

(21) Given an output v = [v1, v2], the input can be re-obtained as follows: 

u2 = (v2 − 𝑡 1 (v1)) · exp (− 𝑠 1 (v1)) ,

u1 = (v1 − 𝑡 2 (u2)) · exp (− 𝑠 2 (u2)) .

(22) All operations in Equations 21 and 22 are performed element wise. Note here (Fig. 9) that in both directions of computation, the coefficient-defining functions 𝑠 𝑖 , 𝑡 𝑖 , 𝑖 ∈ { 1, 2} are passed through in the same direction, hence they themselves do not need to be invertible. Thus, these functions can be arbitrary. Furthermore, as transformations are always applied to only one half of the input at a time, the Jacobians obtained from coupling blocks are triangular, thus fulfilling the requirements for an efficient computation in e.g. Equation 14. 

4 INN Implementation and Tuning 

In this section, the configuration of the INN as well as the tuning algorithm used to derive its most relevant hyperparameters will be discussed. Furthermore, a description and overview of surrogate models used to validate INN configurations as well as to further boost performance by data augmentation will be given. Lastly, a short overview of hardware time and resource requirements is provided. 

4.1 INN Architecture and Tuning. Important hyperparameters of the INN Architecture itself will be discussed first, followed by those relevant to the training process. Lastly, an overview of the tuning procedure will be given. 

Model Architecture. The INN used in this work was implemented in Python using the Framework for Easily Invertible Ar-chitectures [28] and consists of ten coupling blocks (see Fig. 9, Eqs. 21 and 22). Each of the sub-functions 𝑠 𝑖 , 𝑡 𝑖 , 𝑖 ∈ { 1, 2} was selected as a feed forward neural network consisting of three fully connected layers with a width of 115 neurons. Rectified Linear Units (ReLU, [29]) were applied as activation functions between layers. Between coupling blocks, invertible coordinate permuta-tions were applied to output vectors as in [23] and [15] to enhance interaction of individual variables. 

Training Parameters. The INN was trained using an Adams opti-mizer [30] with a weight decay of 2e-05. Training ran over 3000 epochs with a batch size of 200 and an initial learning rate of 0.001, which was reduced by a factor of 10 after 1000 and 2000 epochs. The weights of the individual losses (see Eq. 17 and Eq. 20) were set as [𝜆 x, 𝜆 y, 𝜆 z] = [2000 , 4000 , 400 ].

Tuning. A hyperband algorithm [31] was implemented using the 

SMAC3 optimization package [32] to tune important INN and train-ing hyperparameters which included the learning rate, batch size, number of coupling blocks, width (number of neurons) of the sub functions 𝑠 𝑖 , 𝑡 𝑖 (Eqs. 21 and 22), as well as the weights [𝜆 x, 𝜆 y, 𝜆 z]

of the training losses (Eqs. 17 and 20). Hyperband itself utilizes the random search based successive halving algorithm [33]. This method randomly initializes hyperparameter configurations and trains them until the first of a set of user-defined budget limits, e.g. on trained epochs, is reached. Then, the worst performing configurations are cancelled in order to save computation time for better performing runs, which are continued until the next budget limit is reached. The core addition contributed by Hyperband is to start multiple succesive halving runs with different initial budget limits to avoid cancelling potentially well-performing runs that show lower performance on the first epochs too soon. To obtain a measure on the ability of different INN con-figurations to accurately generate designs for a wide range of targets, each trained model configuration was ran in the generative direction (see Equation 19) to generate design pa-rameter vectors {xGen  

> 𝑖

}𝑛 𝑖 =1 for a predefined set of target labels 

{yTarget  

> 𝑖

}𝑛 𝑖 =1 = {[ Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel , 𝑈 𝑀 , 𝐺 ]Target  

> 𝑖

}𝑛 𝑖 =1:

xGen  

> 𝑖

= INN −1 (yTarget  

> 𝑖

, zi), zi ∈ N(0, 1). (23) After obtaining the corresponding label values yGen  

> 𝑖

for gener-ated xGen  

> 𝑖

, the mean absolute error ( MAE ) between targets and achieved values is calculated for each performance label 𝑦 ∈{𝑈 𝑀 , Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel , 𝐺 } individually and used as tuning objective: 

𝜖 𝑦 = MAE (𝑦 Target  

> 𝑖

, 𝑦 Gen  

> 𝑖

) =∑︁  

> 𝑛 𝑖 =1

|𝑦 Target  

> 𝑖

− 𝑦 Gen  

> 𝑖

|

𝑛 . (24) 

yGen needs to be obtained for a sufficiently large number of xGen ,as well as for each of the several hundreds of tuning runs. This makes the original workflow from Section 2 impractical due to constraints in time and computational resources. Hence, surrogate models have been introduced for fast label prediction. 

4.2 Surrogate Models and Data Augmentation. To quickly and reliably gauge the performance of the large number of INN hyper-parameter configurations initialized during tuning, surrogate mod-els were employed to emulate the forward process (Section 2) of deriving the performance labels y from design parameters x. In the following, architecture, performance and further application of these models for data augmentation are described. 

8 / GTP-24-1269 Transactions of the ASME Surrogate Model Training. A total of three surrogate models 

𝑆 𝑈 𝑀 , 𝑆 Δ 𝑝 𝑡, rel and 𝑆 𝐺 were trained, each predicting the respective label from given design parameters x. Each surrogate model was chosen as a fully connected neural network consisting of 5 layers with a width of up to 200 neurons. ReLU activation functions were again applied between layers. Training was performed on a subset Dtrain consisting of 1000 points from the original dataset D

(see Section 2.5) using Adams optimizers. The remaining points of D were used as a test dataset Dtest to validate model perfor-mance. Again, Hyperband was applied to optimize individual hy-perparemeters such as learning rate and trained epochs. 

Surrogate Model Performance. The surrogate models were vali-dated by the mean absolute errors (see Eq. 24) between predicted labels 

y𝑆 = [𝑈 𝑆 𝑀 , Δ𝑝 𝑆 𝑡 , rel , 𝐺 𝑆 ] = [𝑆 𝑈 𝑀 (x), 𝑆 Δ 𝑝 𝑡, rel (x), 𝑆 𝐺 (x)] (25) for 𝑛 = 295 parameter vectors x ∈ Dtest and corresponding labels 

y ∈ Dtest :

𝜖 𝑆 𝑦  

> 𝑦

=∑︁  

> 𝑛 𝑖 =1

|𝑦 𝑆 𝑖 − 𝑦 𝑖 |

𝑛 , 𝑦 ∈ { 𝑈 𝑀 , Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel , 𝐺 }. (26) As shown in Table 2, the average surrogate model precision is sufficient to approximate simulation results. 

Table 2 Mean absolute surrogate model errors for each La-bel. 

𝑦 𝑈 𝑀 Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel 𝐺 𝜖 𝑆 𝑦  

> 𝑦

0.0131 0.00014 0.0251 

Data Augmentation. Aside from validating configurations during tuning, the surrogate models were further utilized for data augmen-tation, i.e. to create larger datasets Daug for INN training by sam-pling new, larger quantities of design parameter vectors x and pre-dicting the corresponding labels y = [𝑆 𝑈 𝑀 (x), 𝑆 Δ 𝑝 𝑡, rel (x), 𝑆 𝐺 (x)] 

instead of obtaining them through the original simulation work-flow from Section 2. Using the tuned INN architecture obtained in Section 4.1, data augmentation sizes between 2 000 and 200 000 

were trained and tested for their capability of accurately generating designs for a wide range of targets. This was done as described by Equations 23 and 24 with yGen  

> 𝑖

being predicted by the surrogate models as in Eq. 25. The results of this ablation study are dis-played in Fig. 10. Performance increases with augmentation size for the range tested, outweighing the potential noise introduced to the augmented data by the average surrogate model error (see Ta-ble 2). Thus, an INN trained on an augmented dataset containing 

200 000 points was used to conduct the validation experiments in the next section. 

4.3 Time and Resource Requirements. INN and surrogate model training was performed on a Nvidia A100 GPU with 80 GB 

of Memory. With this capacity, all three surrogate models were trained simultaneously within 20 minutes. During tuning, INNs were trained on smaller datasets containing 1000 points, again allowing for the evaluation of 10 configurations at a time within 15 minutes. Thus, while tuning can be continued indefinitely, sufficient results were obtained within 24 hours. Lastly, training the final INN configuration on the fully augmented dataset finished within 40 hours. In contrast to these efforts, CFD Simulations for the gener-ation of the dataset (see Section 2) were performed on a Siemens Energy in-house HPC-Cluster with each simulation requiring an average of 96 CPU hours. Running 10 simulations in parallel using 240 CPU cores in total, the generation of all 1295 datapoints took approximately 21 days. 

Fig. 10 Errors ϵy (Eq. 24) on individual labels by size of the augmented training dataset. The error on ∆pt,rel was scaled by a factor of 100 for visibility. 

5 Results 

In this section, the diversity and validity of designs generated by the INN is tested by a workflow consisting of the definition of target label vectors (Sec. 5.1), generation of designs for the defined targets with subsequent filtering for validity (Sec. 5.2), prevalidation us-ing surrogate models and cross-validating a subset of prevalidated generated designs using the original dataset generation workflow (Sec. 5.3). Finally, a comparison study using a baseline approach realized by Gaussian processes is conducted in Section 5.4. 

5.1 Definition of Targets. A three-dimensional grid of target vectors consisting of three distinct target values for each considered performance label [𝑈 𝑀 , Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel , 𝐺 ] was defined. For 𝑈 𝑀 , values of 2% , 6% and 10% were chosen. For Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel , 3.3% , 4% and 4.5% 

were selected, covering the full range of this label in the underlying dataset. For 𝐺 , target values of −0.5, 0 and 0.5 were defined to test the INN’s consistency in generating both thermoacoustically stable and unstable designs as well as to investigate the behavior on the stability boundary. The chosen target label values are listed in Table 3 and result in 27 individual target label vectors yTarget  

> 𝑖

.

Table 3 Grid points for target label vectors used for valida-tion. 

Label Target Values 

𝑈 𝑀 0.02 0.06 0.1 

Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel 0.033 0.04 0.045 

𝐺 -0.5 0 0.5 

5.2 Generation and Filtering of Designs. For each 

yTarget  

> 𝑖

, 𝑖 ∈ {1, · · · , 27 }, a set of 𝑛 = 5000 parameter vec-tors {xGen ,𝑖 𝑗 }𝑛 𝑗 =1 was generated using the INN. Generated designs were then filtered to remain within the boundaries of the initial dataset (Fig. 6) for each respective independent parameter, with an average yield rate of 60% for valid deigns. Figure 11 gives an overview over the distributions of individual parameters of designs generated for each target value (represented by colors) of the individual labels 𝑈 𝑀 (top), Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel (center) and 𝐺 (bottom). For instance, the green distributions in the top row correspond to the independent parameters of all generated designs xGen ,𝑖 

for all target vectors yTarget  

> 𝑖

that have a target unmixedness of 

𝑈 Target  

> 𝑀

= 0.1 while having any of the respective predefined values 

Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power GTP-24-1269 / 9 Fig. 11 Distributions of the independent parameters xGen of generated designs by target labels yTarget and their respective values (top: UM , center: ∆pt,rel , bottom: G). 

Fig. 12 Distributions of labels y Gen obtained for generated designs for target labels y Target (left: UM , center: ∆pt,rel , right: 

G), colored by target values. 

(Table 3) for Δ𝑝 Target  

> 𝑡 , rel

and 𝐺 Target .A variety of different alternatives of design parameters xGen can be realized for a given choice of target labels. Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel largely deter-mines the distributions of generated parameters 𝑅 𝐴 (first column, center) and 𝑅 𝐷 (fourth column, center) while having no significant influence on the distribution of 𝐷 𝑀 . 𝑁 𝐻 is primarily influenced by the choice of 𝑈 𝑀 . A target value of 2% almost exclusively generates xGen with 8 injection holes, while a target value of 𝑈 𝑀 =

10% yields an even distribution of designs between 𝑁 𝐻 = 4 and 

𝑁 𝐻 = 8. The choice of 𝐺 has an impact on generated values for the plenum length 𝐿 𝑃 and the diameter of the premixing tube 𝐷 𝑀 

which itself is correlated to the length of the premixing tube 𝐿 𝑀 

via the parameter 𝑅 𝐿 . The observed dependencies between target labels and generated parameter distributions are in agreement with the physical relationships between parameters and labels discussed in Section 2.5. 

5.3 Validation. Each individual filtered Set {xGen ,𝑖 𝑗 } was prevalidated as in Eq. 24 using the surrogate models introduced in Section 4.2, identifying the subset of the 20% best performing designs. From each of the identified subsets, a selection of 𝑘 = 15 

designs {xGen ,𝑖 𝑗 }𝑘 𝑗 =1 was made while maximizing the Euclidean distance between the independent parameters of subsequent choices to ensure maximal diversity. For the resulting Set 

{xGen ,𝑖 𝑗 | 𝑖 ∈ {1, · · · , 27 }, 𝑗 ∈ {1, · · · , 15 }} of 405 parameter vectors, the true label vectors yGen  

> 𝑖, 𝑗

were obtained using the original simulation workflow from Section 2. The obtained label values 𝑦 Gen  

> 𝑖, 𝑗

, 𝑦 ∈ { 𝑈 𝑀 , Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel , 𝐺 } are displayed via the histogram plots in Fig. 12, which are divided analogously to Fig. 11 by individual labels 𝑈 𝑀 (left), Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel (center) and 𝐺 (right) and colored by the individual target values for each label. Table 4 furthermore gives a numerical evaluation by providing mean 𝜇 (𝑦 )

and standard deviation 𝜎 (𝑦 ) of the obtained yGen  

> 𝑖, 𝑗

for each target value of each respective label. 

Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel is the best performing label yielding high accuracy of gen-erated designs. This was expected due to the strong correlations between parameters and Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel present in the dataset, but also due to the high accuracy of the pressure loss prediction using the applied CFD methods. More uncertainty is introduced with 𝑈 𝑀 ,with most designs falling within a deviation of ±2% around the re-spective target value. The highest uncertainty is observed with 𝐺 .Here, designs targeting a value of −0.5 all remain negative, albeit with higher spread of up to 0.27 in both directions. For 𝐺 = 0,

10 / GTP-24-1269 Transactions of the ASME Table 4 Mean μ and standard deviation σ for true label val-ues y Gen obtained from generated designs for each target label value yT ar g et .

𝑦 𝑦 Target 𝜇 (𝑦 Gen ) 𝜎 (𝑦 Gen )

𝑈 𝑀 

0.02 0.0222 0.0078 0.06 0.0572 0.0131 0.1 0.0916 0.0165 

Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel 

0.033 0.03306 0.00014 0.04 0.04011 0.00015 0.045 0.0453 0.00034 

𝐺 

-0.5 -0.4938 0.0826 0 -0.0959 0.2618 0.5 0.4415 0.2765 the spread increases further, with results ranging between −0.56 

and outliers above 1, while the majority of cases remains centered around the target label value. Further disagreement between tar-gets and results is observed for 𝐺 = 0.5, which may be due to lower prevalence of unstable designs in the dataset. However, all evaluated designs remain of positive growth rate, hence the main objective of reliably generating either thermoacoustically stable or unstable designs can be viewed as fulfilled. In Fig. 12 and Table 4, 5 % of generated designs that yielded outlier values of 𝐺 Gen > 1

were clipped to a value of 1. The errors found between target label values and generated label values are composed both of the error imposed by the INN and the errors of the prediction methods. The significantly higher prediction errors for the unmixedness and the growth rate result in wider distributions for these labels seen in Fig. 12. 

5.4 Comparison to Gaussian Process Baseline. Gaussian pro-cesses (GP) are a versatile machine learning tool that is widely used in gas turbine optimization [3]. In contrast to invertible mod-els, GPs only learn the forward direction. The inverse problem can be approximated by 

min  

> x∈X

∥y − GP (x)∥ 2 (27) and solved by numerical optimization. In this baseline study, the Nelder-Mead pseudo-simplex algorithm [34] was used. To ensure diversity of retrieved designs, starting points 𝑥 0 for the optimization problem (Eq. 27) are sampled from a uniform distribution on X. Here, GP (x) stands for three distinct GP models trained to predict each respective label 𝑦 ∈ { 𝑈 𝑀 , Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel , 𝐺 }.The GPs have been fitted using the the standard settings of the scikit-learn Python3 library. The Nelder-Mead minimizer was taken from the same library. In all cases, convergence was reached within one to three seconds prior to the maximum number of iterations, which was set to 1000. With this method, 𝑛 = 2000 designs {xGP ,𝑖 𝑗 }𝑛 𝑗 =1 were obtained for each yTarget  

> 𝑖

defined in Section 5.1 and filtered as described in Section 5.2, with an average valid design yield of 50%. In analogy to Section 5.3, designs for each yTarget  

> 𝑖

were prevalidated by the fitted GP models to identify the 20% best performing designs, for which the true label vectors yGP were then obtained via the surrogate models (Section 4.2). Table 5 provides the mean absolute errors (see Eq. 24) 

𝜖 GP = MAE (𝑦 Target , 𝑦 GP ) of the baseline model and 𝜖 INN =

MAE (𝑦 Target , 𝑦 Gen ) for the INN approach, displayed again for each target value of each label individually, as well as their relative dif-ference Δ = 𝜖 GP − 𝜖 INN   

> 𝜖 GP

in percent. As is visible, the GP baseline model is outperformed by the INN approach on all target label values, with Δ ranging between 13 .55% for 𝐺 = 0.5 and 94 .85% 

for 𝑈 𝑀 = 0.02 . The big difference between the obtained solutions is a consequence of the non-local nature of the inverse problem, which leads the Nelder-Mead descent algorithm to be caught in local minima of the GPs. Global optimization algorithms can po-tentially overcome this problem; they would, however, be at risk of undergoing a mode collapse and thus not producing sufficiently diverse designs.  

> Table 5 Mean absolute errors between target and obtained label values for Gaussian process baseline (

ϵGP ) and INN (ϵINN ), as well as the relative difference between the former and the latter. Slight change from previous publication due to correction of code error. 

𝑦 𝑦 Target 𝜖 GP 𝜖 INN Δ (%) 

𝑈 𝑀 

0.02 0.1262 0.0065 94.85 0.06 0.0915 0.0113 87.65 0.1 0.0828 0.0134 83.82 

Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel 

0.033 0.0010 0.0001 90.00 0.04 0.0013 0.0002 84.62 0.045 0.0041 0.0004 90.24 

𝐺 

-0.5 0.0916 0.0632 31.00 0 0.6172 0.2456 60.20 0.5 0.2163 0.1870 13.55 A further advantage of the generative workflow lies in the com-putation time during model inference. For the GP baseline, each sampled starting point 𝑥 0 and hence any generated design requires a separate solving of (Eq. 27) taking about one second. Thus, the production of a sufficient number of design alternatives for a given set of labels yTarget can take up to an hour, whereas the generation of designs with INN s is instantaneous and therefore suited for in-teractive design meetings if combined with fast 3D visualization. Additionally, this allows to further enhance diversity by generating designs for ranges 𝑦 Target 1 < · · · < 𝑦 Target  

> 𝑛

when only the fulfillment of certain inequality constraints, e.g. 𝐺 < 0, is required. INN sfurthermore guarantee the continuous change of the designs with continuous changes in the requirements, provided the noise vector is held fixed, while this is not the case for inverse problems on GPs. This favorable property of INN s supports the understanding of design principles by engineers. Thus, for the specific purpose of inverse design and the use case considered here, INN s clearly outperform the GP baseline. Cer-tainly, there are other domains of application, like surrogate based optimization, where GPs presumably are superior to INN s. 

6 Conclusion and Outlook 

This work demonstrated a generative design workflow using In-vertible Neural Networks. The workflow has been applied to a generic combustion system and is able to produce diverse design alternatives which meet predefined performance requirements. The dataset on which the generative design method is trained consists of six design parameters and three associated performance labels which were produced with CFD as well as the reacting flow net-work tool GeneAC. The dataset was further augmented using sur-rogate models. The methodology can be easily expanded to include more design parameters and labels. The performance labels can also be produced by experiments instead of computations, or by a mixture of both. Generally, the design methodology aims at building up a large training data space which will be continuously expanded and will automatically include lessons learnt from past design efforts. It will accelerate the design process for generating new combustion systems which are needed to fuel 100% H 2. The presented generative design methodology differentiates to Multi Disciplinary Optimization (MDO) by issuing a variety of differ-ent potential design solutions rather than one optimal solution. 

Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power GTP-24-1269 / 11 The set of potential solutions can then be further narrowed down in consecutive design steps like manufacturability reviews. Since the generative design methodology generates new design solutions, they can be used to further extend the training dataset and hence establish an active learning approach. As a next step, the current methodology is applied to the design of the premixing passage of burners capable of 100% H 2. Free form design elements are used to represent the complex shapes of the purge system. In this context, the flashback propensity is introduced as an additional performance parameter that will be obtained both through experiments and computations. 

Acknowledgments 

The authors acknowledge financial support through grant no. 03EE5069H by the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Cli-mate Action (Germany) and by Siemens Energy. 

Funding Data 

• German Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Action (Grant No. 03EE5069H) 

References 

[1] Krebs, W., Schulz, A., Witzel, B., Johnson, C., Laster, W., Pent, J., Schilp, R., Wasif, S., and Weaver, A., 2022, “Advanced Combustion System for High Efficiency (ACE) of the New SGT5/6-9000HL Gas Turbine,” Turbo Expo: Power for Land, Sea, and Air , Vol. 86007, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, p. V03BT04A018, doi: 10.1115/GT2022-82299. [2] Witzel, B., Moëll, D., Parsania, N., Yilmaz, E., and Koenig, M., 2022, “Devel-opment of a Fuel Flexible H2-Natural Gas Gas Turbine Combustion Technology Platform,” Turbo Expo: Power for Land, Sea, and Air , Vol. 86007, American So-ciety of Mechanical Engineers, p. V03BT04A036, doi: 10.1115/GT2022-82881. [3] Forrester, A., Sobester, A., and Keane, A., 2008, Engineering Design via Sur-rogate Modelling: a Practical Guide , John Wiley & Sons, UK. [4] Santner, T. J., Williams, B. J., Notz, W. I., and Williams, B. J., 2003, The Design and Analysis of Computer Experiments , Vol. 1, Springer, NY. [5] Zhou, Q., Zhao, M., Hu, J., and Ma, M., 2022, Multi-Fidelity Surrogates: Modeling, Optimization and Applications , Vol. 12 of Engineering Applications of Computational Methods, Springer, Singapore. [6] Groetsch, C. W. and Groetsch, C., 1993, Inverse Problems in the Mathematical Sciences , Vol. 52, Springer, Wiesbaden, Germany. [7] Sohl-Dickstein, J., Weiss, E., Maheswaranathan, N., and Ganguli, S., 2015, “Deep Unsupervised Learning Using Nonequilibrium Thermodynamics,” Pro-ceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning , Proceed-ings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 37, PMLR, Lille, France, pp. 2256– 2265, https://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/sohl-dickstein15.html [8] Croitoru, F., Hondru, V., Ionescu, R., and Shah, M., 2023, “Diffusion Models in Vision: A Survey,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis &; Machine Intelligence, 45 (09), pp. 10850–10869. [9] Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P., and Ommer, B., 2022, “High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models,” Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-nition , IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, pp. 10684–10695, doi: 10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01042. [10] Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S., Courville, A., and Bengio, Y., 2020, “Generative Adversarial Networks,” Communications of the ACM, 63 (11), pp. 139–144. [11] Kim, H., Kim, J., Won, S., and Lee, C., 2021, “Unsupervised Deep Learning for Super-Resolution Reconstruction of Turbulence,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 

910 , p. A29. [12] Drygala, C., Winhart, B., di Mare, F., and Gottschalk, H., 2022, “Generative Modeling of Turbulence,” Physics of Fluids, 34 (3), p. 035114. [13] Gui, J., Sun, Z., Wen, Y., Tao, D., and Ye, J., 2021, “A Review on Generative Adversarial Networks: Algorithms, Theory, and Applications,” IEEE Transac-tions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 35 (4), pp. 3313–3332. [14] Chen, R. T. Q., Rubanova, Y., Bettencourt, J., and Duvenaud, D. K., 2018, “Neural Ordinary Differential Equations,” Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , Vol. 31, Curran Associates, Inc., https://proceedings.neurips. cc/paper_files/paper/2018/file/69386f6bb1dfed68692a24c8686939b9-Paper.pdf [15] Ardizzone, L., Kruse, J., Wirkert, S. J., Rahner, D., Pellegrini, E. W., Klessen, R. S., Maier-Hein, L., Rother, C., and Köthe, U., 2018, “Analyzing Inverse Problems with Invertible Neural Networks,” ArXiv, abs/1808.04730 .[16] Chan, R., Penquitt, S., and Gottschalk, H., 2023, “LU-Net: Invertible Neural Networks Based on Matrix Factorization,” arXiv2302.10524, https://arxiv.org/ abs/2302.10524 [17] Krebs, W., Krediet, H., Portillo, E., Hermeth, S., Poinsot, T., Schimek, S., and Paschereit, O., 2013, “Comparison of Nonlinear to Linear Thermoacoustic Stability Analysis of a Gas Turbine Combustion System,” J. of Eng. Gas Turbines and Power, 135 (8), p. 081503. [18] Siemens, 2019, “STAR-CCM+ User Guide Version 13.04,” Siemens PLM Soft-ware Inc. [19] Krüger, U., Hüren, J., Hoffmann, S., Krebs, W., Flohr, P., and Bohn, D., 2001, “Prediction and Measurement of Thermoacoustic Improvements in Gas Turbines with Annular Combustion Systems,” J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 123 (3), pp. 557–566. [20] Krebs, W., Flohr, P., Prade, B., and Hoffmann, S., 2002, “Thermoacoustic Stability Chart for High Intense Gas Turbine Combustion Systems,” Combustion Science and Technology, 174 (7), pp. 99–128. [21] McKay, M. D., Beckman, R. J., and Conover, W. J., 2000, “A Comparison of Three Methods for Selecting Values of Input Variables in the Analysis of Output from a Computer Code,” Technometrics, pp. 239–245. [22] Ardizzone, L., Lüth, C., Kruse, J., Rother, C., and Köthe, U., 2019, “Guided Image Generation with Conditional Invertible Neural Networks,” ArXiv e-prints ,arXiv1907.02392, https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.02392 [23] Kingma, D. P. and Dhariwal, P., 2018, “Glow: Generative Flow with Invert-ible 1x1 Convolutions,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett, eds., Vol. 31, Curran Associates, Inc., https://proceedings.neurips.cc/ paper_files/paper/2018/file/d139db6a236200b21cc7f752979132d0-Paper.pdf [24] Ishikawa, I., Teshima, T., Tojo, K., Oono, K., Ikeda, M., and Sugiyama, M., 2023, “Universal Approximation Property of Invertible Neural Networks,” Jour-nal of Machine Learning Research, 24 (287), pp. 1–68. [25] Dinh, L., Sohl-Dickstein, J., and Bengio, S., 2016, “Density Estimation using Real NVP,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.08803. [26] Kobyzev, I., Prince, S. J., and Brubaker, M. A., 2021, “Normalizing Flows: An Introduction and Review of Current Methods,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 43 (11), pp. 3964–3979. [27] Gretton, A., Borgwardt, K. M., Rasch, M. J., Schölkopf, B., and Smola, A., 2012, “A Kernel Two-Sample Test,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, 

13 (25), pp. 723–773. [28] Ardizzone, L., Bungert, T., Draxler, F., Köthe, U., Kruse, J., Schmier, R., and Sorrenson, P., 2018-2022, “Framework for Easily Invertible Architectures (FrEIA),” https://github.com/vislearn/FrEIA [29] Fukushima, K., 1975, “Cognitron: A Self-Organizing Multilayered Neural Net-work,” Biological Cybernetics, 20 (3-4), pp. 121–136. [30] Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J., 2017, “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization,” arXiv1412.6980, https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980 [31] Li, L., Jamieson, K., DeSalvo, G., Rostamizadeh, A., and Talwalkar, A., 2018, “Hyperband: A Novel Bandit-Based Approach to Hyperparameter Optimiza-tion,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18 (185), pp. 1–52. [32] Lindauer, M., Eggensperger, K., Feurer, M., Biedenkapp, A., Deng, D., Ben-jamins, C., Ruhkopf, T., Sass, R., and Hutter, F., 2022, “SMAC3: A Versatile Bayesian Optimization Package for Hyperparameter Optimization,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23 (54), pp. 1–9. [33] Bergstra, J. and Bengio, Y., 2012, “Random Search for Hyper-Parameter Opti-mization,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13 (10), pp. 281–305. [34] Nelder, J. A. and Mead, R., 1965, “A Simplex Method for Function Minimiza-tion,” The Computer Journal, 7(4), pp. 308–313. [35] Kossale, Y., Airaj, M., and Darouichi, A., 2022, “Mode Collapse in Generative Adversarial Networks: An Overview,” 2022 8th Interna-tional Conference on Optimization and Applications (ICOA) , pp. 1–6, doi: 10.1109/ICOA55659.2022.9934291. [36] Ardizzone, L., Kruse, J., Wirkert, S., Rahner, D., Pellegrini, E. W., Klessen, R. S., Maier-Hein, L., Rother, C., and Köthe, U., 2019, “Analyzing Inverse Problems with Invertible Neural Networks,” ArXiv e-prints , arXiv1808.04730, https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.04730 [37] Radford, A., Narasimhan, K., Salimans, T., Sutskever, I., et al., 2018, “Im-proving Language Understanding by Generative Pre-Training,” OpenAI, San Francisco, CA, USA. [38] Dinh, L., Krueger, D., and Bengio, Y., 2015, “NICE: Non-linear Independent Components Estimation,” 1410.8516, https://arxiv.org/abs/1410.8516 [39] Rezende, D. and Mohamed, S., 2015, “Variational Inference with Normalizing Flows,” Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , F. Bach and D. Blei, eds., Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 37, PMLR, Lille, France, pp. 1530–1538, https://proceedings.mlr.press/ v37/rezende15.html 

12 / GTP-24-1269 Transactions of the ASME List of Figures 

1 Generative design workflow. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 Overview of the parameterized combustor geometry defined by independent parameter vectors x. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 Top three charts: Normalized magnitude of flow velocity V, progress variable 𝑐 and normalized deviation between local mixture fraction 𝑍 𝐹 and global mixture fraction 𝑍 𝐹 , 𝑔 at the longitudinal 𝑥 -𝑦 -plane of the geometry. Locations outside of the colorbar range are colored white. Bottom chart: Normalized difference between mass flow averaged total pressure 

¯𝑝 𝑡 and the corresponding value at the domain outlet ¯𝑝 𝑡 ,𝑂 and fuel/air unmixedness 𝑈 along the 𝑥 -direction of the domain. 44 Quarter wave mode (f= 86 Hz) of an exemplary simulation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55 Three quarter wave mode (f= 204 Hz) of an exemplary simulation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56 Scatter plot of all data points of the combustor dataset D, displaying relationships between parameters x on the x-axis and labels y on the y-axis. The dashed horizontal line in the third row represents the boundary 𝐺 = 0 of theromacoustic stability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67 Different 𝑥 can result in the same 𝑦 (left), which leads to errors in direct backwards modeling (center). This is alleviated by introducing a latent variable 𝑧 (right). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78 Training process of an INN in both directions with relevant losses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79 Illustration of operations performed by a coupling block in the forward (top) and backward (bottom) direction. . . . . . . 810 Errors 𝜖 𝑦 (Eq. 24) on individual labels by size of the augmented training dataset. The error on Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel was scaled by a factor of 100 for visibility. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 911 Distributions of the independent parameters xGen of generated designs by target labels yTarget and their respective values (top: 𝑈 𝑀 , center: Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel , bottom: 𝐺 ). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 12 Distributions of labels 𝑦 Gen obtained for generated designs for target labels 𝑦 Target (left: 𝑈 𝑀 , center: Δ𝑝 𝑡 , rel , right: 𝐺 ), colored by target values. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 

List of Tables 

1 Independent parameters x of the combustor dataset. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 Mean absolute surrogate model errors for each Label. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93 Grid points for target label vectors used for validation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94 Mean 𝜇 and standard deviation 𝜎 for true label values 𝑦 Gen obtained from generated designs for each target label value 

𝑦 𝑇 𝑎𝑟 𝑔𝑒𝑡 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 5 Mean absolute errors between target and obtained label values for Gaussian process baseline ( 𝜖 GP ) and INN ( 𝜖 INN ), as well as the relative difference between the former and the latter. Slight change from previous publication due to correction of code error. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 

Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power GTP-24-1269 / 13