Title: Differentiable Power-Flow Optimization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.28203v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 01:51:53 GMT

Number of Pages: 40

Markdown Content:
# Graphical Abstract 

Differentiable Power-Flow Optimization 

Muhammed Öz, Jasmin Hörter, Kaleb Phipps, Charlotte Debus, Achim Streit, Markus Götz 

> arXiv:2603.28203v1 [cs.AI] 30 Mar 2026

# Highlights 

Differentiable Power-Flow Optimization 

Muhammed Öz, Jasmin Hörter, Kaleb Phipps, Charlotte Debus, Achim Streit, Markus Götz 

• We use the concept of differentiable simulations on AC-power-flow op-timizations. 

• Our Differentiable Power-flow (DPF) method is scalable in terms of runtime and memory usage. 

• The calculation of multiple power-flows can be accelerated via the GPU, making use of sparse tensors and batching. 

• When calculating power-flows for time series, DPF is able to effectively reuse previous solutions for faster convergence. 

• DPF can be used as a fast screening method which can be accelerated by early stopping. 

• Easy implementation using common automatic differentiation libraries like PyTorch. Differentiable Power-Flow Optimization 

Muhammed Öz a, ∗, Jasmin Hörter a, Kaleb Phipps a, Charlotte Debus a,Achim Streit a, Markus Götz a,b, ∗

> aScientific Computing Center (SCC), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), 76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany
> bHelmholtz AI, Karlsruhe

Abstract 

With the rise of renewable energy sources and their high variability in genera-tion, the management of power grids becomes increasingly complex and com-putationally demanding. Conventional AC-power-flow simulations, which use the Newton-Raphson (NR) method, suffer from poor scalability, making them impractical for emerging use cases such as joint transmission–distribution modeling and global grid analysis. At the same time, purely data-driven surrogate models lack physical guarantees and may violate fundamental con-straints. In this work, we propose Differentiable Power-Flow (DPF) , a re-formulation of the AC power-flow problem as a differentiable simulation. 

DPF enables end-to-end gradient propagation from the physical power mis-matches to the underlying simulation parameters, thereby allowing these parameters to be identified efficiently using gradient-based optimization. We demonstrate that DPF provides a scalable alternative to NR by leveraging GPU acceleration, sparse tensor representations, and batching capabilities available in modern machine-learning frameworks such as PyTorch. DPF is especially suited as a tool for time-series analyses due to its efficient reuse of previous solutions, for N-1 contingency-analyses due to its ability to process cases in batches, and as a screening tool by leveraging its speed and early stopping capability. The code is available in the authors’ code repository.          

> ∗Please address correspondence to Muhammed Öz or Markus Götz
> Email addresses: muhammed.oez@kit.edu (Muhammed Öz),
> jasmin.hoerter@kit.edu (Jasmin Hörter), kaleb.phipps@kit.edu (Kaleb Phipps),
> charlotte.debus@kit.edu (Charlotte Debus), achim.streit@kit.edu (Achim Streit),
> markus.goetz@kit.edu (Markus Götz)

Keywords: Energy Grid, Power-flow, Optimization, Stochastic Gradient Descent, Automatic Differentiation 

1. Introduction 

Energy grids are among the most critical infrastructures of modern so-ciety and the economy. They must be continuously monitored and actively managed to deliver electricity reliably while maintaining system stability. At the same time, power grids are inherently fragile: the failure of a single com-ponent can trigger cascading effects, as the redistribution of electrical flows may overload other parts of the network (Camus, 2021; Emma Pinedo and Latona, 2025; Lemos et al., 2021). One example of an overload-induced cas-cade is the recent blackout that affected parts of France, Spain, and Portugal on April 28 th 2025 (Emma Pinedo and Latona, 2025). Maintaining grid stability becomes particularly challenging due to the enormous scale of modern power systems. The North American power grid alone encompasses more than 600,000 miles of transmission lines and 5.5 mil-lion miles of distribution lines (Orf, 2023). Benchmark transmission models illustrate this complexity: the European transmission network represented by the case9241pegase test case contains roughly ten thousand high-voltage buses (Josz et al., 2016), while the North American Eastern Interconnec-tion comprises approximately eighty thousand buses (Birchfield and Overbye, 2023). These figures represent only the transmission layer. When distribu-tion networks are included, which is increasingly necessary due to the growing penetration of distributed renewable generation, the scale increases dramat-ically. For example, Texas alone is estimated to contain roughly 46 million electrical nodes when distribution-level infrastructure is considered as well (Mateo et al., 2024). To ensure reliable operation of such large systems, grid operators must keep transmission line flows within thermal limits, maintain stable frequen-cies, and ensure that voltages remain within specified boundaries while con-tinuously balancing electricity supply and demand (Donnot et al., 2017). Achieving this becomes increasingly difficult as power systems grow in size and complexity and as uncertainty rises, for example due to weather-dependent renewable generation (Hamann et al., 2024). Simulation tools play a crucial role in the decision-making process by en-abling the evaluation of different grid states in near real time. Frameworks 2such as Grid2Op (Donnot, 2020a) and Pandapower (Thurner et al., 2018) perform AC-power-flow simulations to assess system stability. These sim-ulations enable several important applications: For example, grid operators perform N-1 contingency analyses (Mitra et al., 2016) to verify that the grid remains stable if a component such as a transmission line or substation fails. Similarly, time-series simulations are used to evaluate grid stability under changing demand and generation conditions throughout the day. To sup-port such applications in operational settings, power-flow simulations must be computationally efficient. Most existing simulation frameworks rely on numerical methods such as 

Newton-Raphson (NR) (Tinney and Hart, 1967) to solve the non-linear AC power-flow equations. While NR remains the state-of-the-art method due to its high accuracy, its computational cost grows rapidly with system size. As a result, NR is not suitable for tackling emerging challenges such as the global grid (Chatzivasileiadis et al., 2013) or integrated transmission–distribution systems (Idema et al., 2013) and it is not suitable for expanding contingency analyses beyond N-1. Machine-learning approaches have therefore been explored to accelerate power-flow computations. A common strategy is to train surrogate mod-els that approximate the physical simulation directly from data (Fikri et al., 2018). Such models can provide substantial computational speedups by elim-inating the need to repeatedly solve the power-flow equations. However, because they replace the underlying physical model with a learned approx-imation, they may violate fundamental physical constraints and struggle to generalize reliably outside the training distribution. To address these limitations, more recent work seeks to combine machine learning with physical laws rather than replacing the simulation entirely. One prominent approach is to incorporate physical laws directly into neural-network architectures, resulting in physics-informed neural networks (Donon et al., 2020; Böttcher et al., 2023; Dogoulis et al., 2025). These models im-prove physical consistency compared to purely data-driven surrogates. Nev-ertheless, they still rely on learned approximations of the system dynamics and therefore do not fully preserve the original physical consistency. This highlights a remaining gap between traditional simulation methods and modern machine-learning approaches. What is needed is a framework that preserves the physical equations without relying on learned approxima-tions, scales favorably to systems with millions of nodes, and preferably lever-ages modern hardware capabilities such as GPU acceleration, batching, and 3sparse operations, and integrates seamlessly with existing machine-learning infrastructure. Rather than learning approximations of the physical system, one way to address these requirements is to make the simulation itself compatible with modern machine-learning methods (Barati, 2025; Okhuegbe et al., 2024; Costilla-Enriquez et al., 2020). Differentiable simulations (Liang and Lin, 2020; Barati, 2025) reformulate the simulation pipeline in a fully differen-tiable manner, enabling gradients to be computed throughout the entire process via automatic differentiation. This preserves the underlying phys-ical equations while enabling the use of efficient gradient-based optimization algorithms such as Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2017) or stochastic gradient de-scent (Ruder, 2017). In the context of power networks, the power-flow prob-lem can therefore be solved by minimizing violations of the power-balance equation derived from Kirchhoff’s current law and Ohm’s law (see Equa-tion (1)). Compared to classical second-order methods such as NR , gradient-based optimization avoids the explicit construction and inversion of large Jacobian matrices and therefore scales more favorably with system size (see Section 5.2). At the same time, differentiable simulations retain physical con-sistency, while naturally leveraging modern machine-learning infrastructure, including GPU acceleration, batching of multiple simulations, and sparse tensor representations. In this work, we propose Differentiable Power-Flow (DPF) , a reformula-tion of the AC power-flow problem as a differentiable simulation. This for-mulation enables end-to-end gradient propagation from the physical power mismatches to the underlying simulation parameters, thereby allowing these parameters to be identified efficiently using gradient-based optimization. We make the following contributions: 1. We introduce DPF , applying the concept of differentiable simulations to AC power-flow calculations. Using synthetic grid data, we analyze the scaling behavior of DPF compared to the classical NR solver and show that 

DPF achieves favorable runtime and memory scaling on large grids. 2. We evaluate the accuracy of DPF on standard test systems by comparing it to 

NR , a highly accurate second-order solver, and to the DC power-flow approx-imation (Qi et al., 2012), which is computationally efficient but less accurate. Our results show that the solution quality of DPF lies between the high ac-curacy of NR and the DC approximation. 3. We demonstrate the practical applicability of DPF for operational grid analyses, focusing on time-series simulations. To fully leverage the strengths of differentiable simulations, our 4Figure 1: Schematic view of the components of the energy grid and the current applications of power flow calculations. 

implementation supports batching, GPU acceleration, warm-start initializa-tion from previous solutions, and sparse tensor representations, which can be naturally integrated using modern machine-learning frameworks such as 

PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019). 

2. Background 

This section provides the foundations for our approach. First, we describe the classical power-flow equations and show how they can be expressed as an optimization problem in Section 2.1. Next, we briefly introduce gradient-based optimization and automatic differentiation, which enable efficient gra-dient computation in differentiable simulations in Section 2.2, and finally, we motivate the use of differentiable simulation techniques for power-flow calculations in Section 2.3. 

2.1. Problem Formulation 

The power grid is a complex system connecting generation and consump-tion through transmission and distribution layers as illustrated in Figure 1. It consists of N buses, or nodes, connected via transmission lines represented in the sparse admittance matrix Ybus . Ybus,ij represents the admittance, i.e., the 5reciprocal of the impedance, between bus i and bus j. Sbus,i = Pi + iQ i ∈ C,

with Pi, Q i ∈ R, denotes the complex nodal power injections at bus i.Using the complete AC-power-flow model, the goal of power-flow sim-ulations is to determine the complex voltages V = |V | ∗ eiθ ∈ CN such that the specified complex nodal injections Sbus and the calculated injections 

Scalc = V I ∗ = V (Ybus V )∗ match. This leads to the non-linear power-balance equation 1:

Sbus 

> !

= Scalc = V I ∗ = V (Ybus V )∗. (1) There are three different bus types in a grid: PV-buses (generators), PQ-buses (loads) and the slack bus (generator with adaptable generation such that the power-balance equation is solvable). Depending on the bus type, different variables among {| V |, θ, P, Q } are specified at bus i:

PV-bus: active power Pi and voltage magnitude |Vi|

PQ-bus: active power Pi and reactive power Qi

Slack bus: voltage Vi

Computing the missing variables is the purpose of AC-power-flow solvers, while the specified variables should not change. Equation (2) shows the problem without voltage boundary conditions: Find {V, P, Q } such that 

Pi = Pcalci ∀i ∈ pv ∪ pq, Qi = Qcalci ∀i ∈ pq, 

|Vi| = |Vi|set ∀i ∈ pv, θslack = 0 ,Vslack = V set slack .

(2) This can be formulated as an optimization problem: 

min   

> |V|pq ,θ pv,pq

|| F (V )|| 2 = || Sbus − V (Ybus V )∗|| 2 s.t. |Vi| = |Vi|set ∀i ∈ pv, θslack = 0 , (3) 

Vslack = V set slack .

There is a variety of different approaches to solve the optimization problem as listed in Section 3. One possible way is to use gradient-based optimization. 

> 1See matpower-manual, sections 3.6 and 4.1.

62.2. Gradient Descent Optimization 

Optimization problems are commonly expressed as the minimization of an objective function f (θ) with parameters θ ∈ Θ. The goal is to find a mini-mizer θ∗ = argmin θ∈Θf (θ). A common approach to do this is to use gradient descent (Andrychowicz et al., 2016). Starting from an initial parameter vec-tor θ0, vanilla gradient descent iteratively updates the parameters by moving towards the negative gradient with a learning rate η:

θt+1 = θt − η∇f (θt) (4) Different methods exist to calculate the gradient ∇f (θt), ranging from exact calculations (manual, symbolic and automatic differentiation) to numerical approximations (Komarov et al., 2025; Baydin et al., 2018). Symbolic differentiation works on expression trees or expression forests by applying the rules of calculus, such as the power rule, product rule, and chain rule, to obtain its derivatives (Zhang, 2025). It can suffer from "expres-sion swell" generating unnecessarily large expressions (Zhang, 2025; Corliss, 1988), but this can be avoided by allowing common subexpressions (Laue, 2022). A convenient and efficient way of utilizing symbolic differentiation is au-tomatic differentiation (autodiff). Autodiff follows the idea that all numer-ical computations are ultimately compositions of a finite set of elementary operations for which derivatives are known. These operations form a com-putational graph in which derivatives can be systematically obtained using the chain rule. The essential algorithmic principle is dynamic programming: partial derivatives are stored at each node and reused, thereby avoiding re-dundant computations. Two main evaluation strategies exist: forward mode and reverse mode autodiff (Baydin et al., 2018). In forward mode, derivatives are propagated alongside the function evaluation from inputs to outputs. In reverse mode, the function is first evaluated in a forward pass, after which partial derivatives are propagated backward from the output to the inputs. The accumulation direction is relevant. For objective functions with many parameters and a scalar output, reverse mode autodiff is particularly efficient because intermediate partial derivatives can be reused during the backward pass. This property makes reverse mode autodiff well suited for large-scale optimization problems and forms the basis of differentiable programming frameworks such as PyTorch. As an example for reverse mode autodiff (similar to Flügel et al.), con-sider the objective function y = f (x1; x2) = g3(g2(g1(x1, x 2))) ∈ R with the 7intermediate scalar values hi = ( gi ◦ gi−1 ◦ · · · ◦ g1)( x1, x 2) ∈ R, gi : R → R

up to index i ∈ N. Then the partial derivative of y with regards to x1 is 

∂y ∂x 1

= ∂y ∂h 2

∂h 2

∂h 1

∂h 1

∂x 1

In a computational graph representation, the variables h2 and h1 correspond to internal nodes, each holding their partial derivatives ∂y ∂h 2 and ∂y ∂h 1 . The key advantage of storing the variables is the reusability. First ∂y ∂h 2 is calculated, then ∂y ∂h 1 using the previously stored derivative from h2. Calculating ∂y ∂x 2

afterwards becomes trivial as ∂y ∂h 1 is already stored inside the inner node and only one local multiplication is required. 

2.3. Differentiable Simulations 

Physical simulations are a prime use cases for reverse mode autodiff, espe-cially for industrial, design, engineering, and robotics applications (Newbury et al., 2024). When simulations are expressed in a differentiable way, they are called differentiable simulations. Formulating a problem in this way can accelerate simulations, but also unlock new applications, e.g., learning un-known system parameters or evaluating their influence on the simulation result by solving an inverse problem (Fan et al., 2020). According to Liang and Lin, a good differentiable simulator should be vectorization friendly (not contain fragmented operations during the forward pass), GPU friendly, and support sparse operations due to the locality of many physical computations. For power flow simulations, all of these criteria are satisfied with the help of automatic differentiation tools such as PyTorch. 

3. Related Work 

A wide range of solutions has been proposed to perform power-flow cal-culations (Alawneh et al., 2023; Sauter et al., 2017). Existing approaches can broadly be categorized into direct methods, iterative numerical methods, and data-driven methods.     

> 2Should be faster than NR in theory and can be used for screening and large grids but in LightSim2Grid NR using a KLU-solver is faster due to implementation reasons.

8Table 1: Power-flow solution methods. Abbreviations: DC: DC-Approximation, HELM: Holomorphic Embedding Load Flow Method, GS: Gauß-Seidel, SA: Successive Approximation, NR: Newton-Raphson, FDLF: Fast Decoupled Load Flow, DPF: Differentiable Power-Flow, GNS: Graph Neural Solver, KCLNet: Kirchhoff Current Law Network. 

Name Description Usage 

Direct methods 

DC approx. (Qi et al., 2012) Remove nonlinearities and solve linear system Screening HELM (Trias, 2012) Embed power-flow equation into holomorphic function Guaranteed solution 

Iterative methods based on fix-point-iterations 

GS (Grainger, 1999) Rewrite power equation as a fix-point iteration and up-date buses sequentially Educational SA (Giraldo et al., 2022) Rewrite power equation as fix-point iteration and up-date buses simultaneously Educational 

Iterative methods based on linearization 

NR (Tinney and Hart, 1967) Jacobian-inversion through matrix decompositions Operational FDLF (Stott and Alsac, 2007) Simplifies NR by removing off-diagonal blocks from Ja-cobian Screening 2

DPF (Barati, 2025) and us Gradient-based optimiza-tion, corresponds to NR with Jacobian-transpose for squared loss function and simple gradient descent Screening, large grids 

Data-driven methods 

- (Fikri et al., 2018) Multi-layer perceptron Fast GNS (Donon et al., 2020) GNN Fast, accurate - (Böttcher et al., 2023) GNN Fast, accurate KCLNet (Dogoulis et al., 2025) GNN w. hard constraints Fast, physical 

93.1. Direct Methods 

Direct methods compute the solution voltage in one iteration. The most widely used direct method is the DC-approximation (Qi et al., 2012) which simplifies the AC power-flow equations to a linear problem by neglecting re-active power effects, voltage magnitude variations, and line resistances. Due to its computational efficiency it is commonly used for screening applications such as contingency analysis, although the resulting power-flow estimates may deviate significantly from the AC solution, with typical errors on the order of 20% (Stott et al., 2009). A more accurate novel method is the Holomorphic Embedding Load Flow (HELM) method (Trias, 2012). It embeds the power equation into a holo-morphic function, constructs and solves a holomorphic power series, and then evaluates the series to get the resulting voltages. While HELM is very sta-ble and can be very accurate, it needs a significant amount of time to reach accurate results comparable to NR (Sauter et al., 2017). As a result, HELM in its base form is too slow to be used as a screening method, for decision tools and for N − 1 analyses. Other variants such as FFHE (Chiang et al., 2017) in combination with NR can achieve a better performance (Huang and Sun, 2023), but it remains to be seen whether a competitive implementation of HELM can outperform NR .

3.2. Iterative Numerical Methods 

Iterative methods solve the power-flow equation through repeated up-dates until convergence in contrast to direct or data-driven methods. They can use other methods as an initialization for better stability (Costilla-Enriquez et al., 2020; Okhuegbe et al., 2024). They can also reuse solutions of similar problems. For example, Grid2Op reuses previous solutions in time series analyses (Donnot et al., 2017). The iterative methods are based on one of two broader concepts: fix-point iterations or linearization. The methods based on fix-point-iterations are Gauß-Seidel (GS) (Grainger, 1999) and the Successive Approximation (SA) method (Giraldo et al., 2022). Both rewrite the power equation as a fix-point iteration to repeatedly up-date voltages. They differ in their update order. GS updates the volt-ages sequentially, bus by bus, and uses the updated values to update the remaining voltages, while the Successive Approximation Method updates the voltages for all buses in parallel using the old voltage values. Both methods are rather conceptional and less practically relevant as they are 10 much slower than linearization-based methods (Donnot, 2020b), especially for larger grids (Sauter et al., 2017). Linearization-based methods approximate the nonlinear equations locally and solve a linear system at each iteration. They include Newton-Raphson (NR), Fast Decoupled Load Flow (FDLF) and gradient-based methods. The standard operational approach is the NR method (Tinney and Hart, 1967). In each iteration of NR , a linear system 

∆V = J−1(−F (V )) ⇔ J∆V = −F (V )

is solved. In practice, NR converges to accurate solutions in a few itera-tions (low single digit) because of its quadratic convergence (Overton, 2017). However, it can be slow when applied to large grids. To speed up NR , it is possible to further simplify the Jacobian. The FDLF method removes the off-diagonal blocks. The key idea is that the voltage angle is strongly coupled with the real power and the voltage magnitude is coupled with reactive power while the cross-couplings are weak. As a result, not much information is lost with the simplification. FDLF is suitable as a fast screening method. How-ever, we do not consider this approach in our comparison as the reported times in the LightSim2Grid benchmark for FDLF are slightly worse than 

NR (Donnot, 2020b). 

3.3. Data-Driven Methods 

Recent research has explored the use of machine learning to approximate power-flow solutions. Early approaches employed multi-layer perceptrons to directly map system states to voltage solutions (Fikri et al., 2018). More re-cent work leverages graph neural networks (GNNs), which better capture the topology of power systems (Donon et al., 2020; Böttcher et al., 2023). The main advantage of these models is their low inference time once trained. But they usually have lower accuracy and sometimes output physically implau-sible predictions (Dogoulis et al., 2025). To prevent this to a certain degree, physics-informed neural networks can be employed to penalize the physical violations in the loss function (soft-constraints) and project the solutions to physically viable planes (hard-constraints) (Dogoulis et al., 2025). However, the authors do not report the additional training time for hard-constraint enforcement via projections. 11 3.4. Gradient-based Approaches 

Gradient-based methods represent an alternative class of iterative solvers that have received comparatively limited attention in the power-flow litera-ture. Unlike Newton-based methods, gradient-based optimization does not require explicit Jacobian factorization and therefore yields computationally inexpensive iterations. However, they typically exhibit linear convergence rates (Garrigos and Gower, 2024), in contrast to the quadratic convergence of NR (Overton, 2017). Previous work has explored gradient-based techniques primarily as auxil-iary tools, for example to improve the robustness of Newton-based solvers or escape local minima using stochastic optimization (Costilla-Enriquez et al., 2020). More recently, Barati (2025) proposed a gradient-based formulation of the power-flow problem. While their work provides a detailed theoret-ical analysis, the reported implementations operate at significantly larger runtimes (seconds instead of milliseconds for small grids such as the case-118 grid) than optimized power-flow solvers. We believe that a fair ex-periment must compare the methods in their optimal state. In this work, we investigate gradient-based power-flow optimization within a differentiable simulation framework and evaluate its practical performance using a highly optimized Newton–Raphson implementation from LightSim2Grid (Donnot, 2020b) as a baseline. Our goal is to identify application scenarios in which dif-ferentiable power flow can complement or outperform state-of-the-art solvers. 

4. The Differentiable Power-Flow Method 

We propose the DPF method, which formulates the AC power-flow prob-lem as a differentiable simulation. The key idea is to express the power-flow equations as a differentiable computational graph, enabling the use of gradient-based optimization to compute the voltage solution while preserving the underlying physical equations. Differentiable simulations are constructed such that every step of the nu-merical computation is differentiable (Pargmann et al., 2024; Newbury et al., 2024). This allows gradients of the simulation output with respect to inter-nal parameters to be computed efficiently using automatic differentiation. Modern machine-learning frameworks such as PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) provide built-in support for this paradigm and enable scalable implementa-tions that leverage GPU acceleration, batching, and sparse tensor operations. 12 Figure 2: The figure depicts the operational graph of the power balance equation. The calculated power Scalc (depending on the current voltage vector) and the actual power 

Sbus are formed and their active/reactive components are used in ycalc and y to create the loss function. The green colored variables, namely the voltage magnitude of PV-buses and the voltage angle of PV and PQ buses, are trainable and are used as the voltage solution after training. 

13 An illustration of using this approach on power-flow simulations is de-picted in Figure 2. Using the paradigm of differentiable simulations in power-flow studies can be done in the following way: The power-balance equation (Equation (1)) defines the forward simulation. The complex bus voltages are represented in polar form as 

V = |V |eiθ .

The unknown voltage magnitudes and phase angles are treated as optimiza-tion variables, while grid-specific parameters such as the sparse admittance matrix Ybus remain fixed. The objective function measures the mismatch between the specified and calculated power injections, 

L(V ) = 1

N ∥Sbus − V (Ybus V )∗∥2,

which corresponds to the mean squared violation of the power-balance equa-tion. Minimizing this loss therefore yields voltages that satisfy the AC power-flow equations. Starting from an initial voltage estimate, the method iter-atively performs forward and backward passes through the computational graph. During the forward pass, PyTorch constructs a dynamic computa-tional graph that records all tensor operations. By invoking backpropagation in the backward pass, PyTorch then applies reverse-mode automatic differen-tiation to traverse this graph and compute gradients of the loss with respect to the trainable voltage variables. These gradients are subsequently used by an optimizer to update the voltage vector. Detailed pseudocode for our approach can be found in the appendix (Algorithm 1). This approach, by design, follows the characteristics of a good simulator as defined by Liang and Lin (2020): it is vectorization friendly, it is GPU-friendly and it supports sparse operations. 

4.1. Implementation Details 

In our DPF implementation (see 1 in the Appendix) we make use of the classical PyTorch training loop 3. In each iteration, we conduct a for-ward pass, calculate the resulting loss, and finally use PyTorch’s automatic differentiation functionality to calculate gradients (using the reverse mode to calculate partial derivatives in the computational graph) and update the 

> 3https://docs .pytorch .org/tutorials/beginner/introyt/trainingyt .html

14 learnable components of the complex voltage (in polar form) using an opti-mizer and a scheduler. It should be noted that the admittance matrix Ybus is stored in sparse compressed row storage format (CSR) and that all variables can be easily be placed on the GPU. In applications involving repeated sim-ulations on the same grid (e.g., time-series analyses), grid-specific quantities such as Ybus and bus-type indices can be reused across iterations. 

4.2. Batched Computation 

An important advantage of the differentiable formulation is the ability to solve multiple power-flow problems simultaneously using batching. This is particularly relevant for applications such as time-series simulations or contingency analyses. To enable batching while preserving the original computational structure, the system matrices and vectors of individual simulations are concatenated. Specifically, the admittance matrices are combined into a block-diagonal ma-trix 

Ybus = blockdiag (Y (i)

> bus

),

while voltage vectors |V | and θ and the other vectors Scalc , out and target are stacked accordingly. The corresponding bus indices are shifted by batch _num ∗

N to reflect the extended system size. This formulation allows multiple power-flow problems to be solved in parallel using a single forward and back-ward pass, enabling efficient utilization of modern hardware accelerators. 

5. Theoretical Evaluation 

In this section, we compare DPF to NR from a theoretical standpoint. We show how they are related in Section 5.1 and compare them with respect to time (Section 5.2), memory (Section 5.3) and stability (Section 5.4). 

5.1. Relation to the Jacobian DPF and NR both use the Jacobian matrix in different ways. The Ja-cobian is defined as all first-order partial derivatives of the complex power mismatch F (V ) = Scalc (V ) − Sbus :

J = J(V ) = ∂F (V )

∂V =  

> ∂P ∂θ ∂P ∂∥V∥
> ∂Q ∂θ ∂Q ∂∥V∥

!

(5) 15 It is a linear approximation of how the power changes with respect to changes in the voltage. 

NR uses the Jacobian to find the voltage update that produces a power equal to the negative power mismatch. This is done by solving the linear system 

∆V = J−1(−F (V )) ⇔ J∆V = −F (V ) (6) The inversion is usually done with sparse LU -decompositions. The new fac-tors L and U can have a larger amount of non-zero elements than the Jacobian due to the fill-in. In contrast, gradient-based methods do not jump towards the solution im-mediately but update the voltage along the direction of the steepest descent. Since a scalar loss is used instead of a full mismatch vector and the corre-sponding Jacobian matrix, gradient-based methods use less information per iteration. For regular gradient descent with the squared error loss function 

L(V ) = 12∥F (V )∥2 = 12F (V )T F (V ) (7) the voltage update vector is 

∆V = −η ∂(L(V )) 

∂V = −ηJ T F (V ) (8) This can be understood as projecting the power mismatch F (V ) back into voltage space through JT (instead of the inverse J−1 in NR ). This approxi-mation has the advantage that the Jacobian’s sparsity can be used effectively without any fill-in. The downside is that the update vector is less accurate and needs to be controlled by a learning rate η.

5.2. Run-time and Convergence NR is well known to converge locally quadratically (Overton, 2017) while gradient descent shows global linear convergence (Garrigos and Gower, 2024). This, however, comes with a cost. NR repeatedly solves a linear system using a large Jacobian matrix. To do this, an LU -decomposition can be used (Donnot, 2020b). While the worst case run time for standard LU -decompositions is cubic, it is possible to exploit the sparsity of the Jacobian to improve run times, e.g., using KLU (Davis and Palamadai Natarajan, 2010). The actual run time depends on the fill-in (additional number of non-zero entries (nnz) in the decomposition compared to the sparse Jacobian). 16 If no fill-in is present ( meaning that nnz (J) = nnz (L) + nnz (R)), then an iteration of NR is in O(nnz (J)) as only nnz (J) operations are needed to create the factorization and to solve the system. In comparison, DPF does not have to solve a linear system. For standard gradient descent with a squared loss function the gradient can be formulated as ∂L (V ) 

> ∂V

= JT F (V ). So the cost is dominated by a matrix vector multiplica-tion with no fill-in with an asymptotic runtime of O(nnz (J)) = O(nnz (Ybus )) ,which is linear for power grids. Overall the total runtime is a tradeoff between the number of iterations needed and the time per iteration. Since this analysis does not account for different optimizers and loss functions, and since the fill-in is unclear, we evaluate the runtime experimentally in Section 6. 

5.3. Memory Usage 

In the following, as defined previously, let N be the number of busses (nodes) and M the number of connections in the grid (edges). Aside from existing inputs (admittance matrix Ybus , injections Sbus and indices pv , pq and 

slack and the voltage vector for the solution) DPF needs to store the com-plex gradient vector ∂L (V ) 

> ∂V

= JT F (V ) consisting of δLOSS δ∥V ∥ and δLOSS δθ , and the complex output vector created from indexing Scalc . By using reverse-mode AD it is not necessary to fully store the Jacobian as a matrix. Instead, the partial derivatives are applied directly in matrix-vector multiplication. In to-tal, additional memory of 2N complex numbers is required while temporarily partial derivatives of size M are used but not stored. As a comparison, NR has to store the Jacobian consisting of the partial derivatives δP δ∥V ∥ , δP δθ , δQ δ∥V ∥ and δQ δθ (4M real numbers as each partial derivative mirrors the sparsity pattern of the admittance matrix), the LU -factorization of the Jacobian (depends on the fill-in) and the complex mismatch vector ( N

complex numbers). We can further simplify this by assuming M ≈ 3N . This is the case because nodes in the grid (substations) are connected locally and have only few connections. Doing this, NR needs to store a total of about 

12 N complex numbers as well as the fill-in from the LU -decomposition. Overall, DPF needs about one sixth of the additional memory NR does with no fill-in. However, with fill-in, the additional memory of NR can be 

O(N 2).17 5.4. Stability NR can be problematic when the starting point is badly chosen or when the method gets stuck in local minima. Costilla-Enriquez et al. solve these problems for very small grids by using stochastic gradient descent for the initialization and for cases where NR gets stuck in local minima. They argue that, even though the Jacobian in NR can lose its full rank, it is often still close to its full rank, which means that the gradient can still provide a useful direction (Costilla-Enriquez et al., 2020). 

6. Experimental Evaluation 

In this section, we evaluate the proposed DPF method with a focus on its scalability and performance in large-scale settings. We consider two sce-narios: (i) power-flow computations on increasingly large grids to analyze scaling behavior, and (ii) time series simulations, where we demonstrate how 

DPF benefits from solution reuse and batching. We explain the experimental setting in Section 6.1 and Section 6.2 and we compare it to established methods in Section 6.4. 

6.1. Simulation Framework and Dataset 

We use the simulation framework Grid2Op and its backend LightSim2Grid 

(Donnot, 2020b) to represent power grids and conduct power-flow simulations via NR. The grid sizes range from 118 buses with the IEEE-118 grid modelling the old American power system (Pena et al., 2017) to 9,241 buses with the case9241pegase grid modeling the European system (Josz et al., 2016) similar to the benchmark experiments in LightSim2Grid 4 (see table A.4 for a table with the used grids). The dataset we use is the Learning Industrial Physical Simulation benchmark suite (LIPS) (Leyli Abadi et al., 2022) for the 118-bus grid. It contains a data-set of different grid states suited for evaluating different power-flow techniques, especially data-driven approaches. For the other grids we use the synthetic data as used in the benchmark experiments. 

6.2. Hardware and Software Environment 

Our differentiable simulation is implemented in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019), a popular deep learning framework, including PyTorch’s sparse library 

> 4https://lightsim2grid .readthedocs .io/en/latest/benchmarks_grid_sizes .html

18 Table 2: Hyperparameters for DPF on the small 118-bus and the large 9,241-bus grid.               

> IEEE118 Case9241pegase Optimizer Adam
> Optimizer parameters lr ( η)0.0034 0.0001
> decay ( β)(0 .979 ,0.963)
> Scheduler Reduce lr on plateau
> Scheduler parameters
> factor 0.547
> patience 41
> threshold 0.0673
> cooldown 97
> Maximum iterations 1,000

to represent admittance matrices in a sparse compressed row storage (csr) format. The experiments were conducted on a gpu4-node with four NVIDIA A100-40 GPUs with 40GB VRAM and dual socket Intel Xeon Platinum 8,368 CPUs. We utilized CUDA 12.4 (Nickolls et al., 2008), NVIDIA’s parallel computing platform, and PyTorch 2.6 (Paszke et al., 2019) to leverage GPU acceleration for faster simulations. 

6.3. Hyperparameters 

To find suitable hyper-parameters on the 118-bus-grid, we used Optuna (Ak-iba et al., 2019). We considered the optimizers Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2017), SGD (Ruder, 2017) and RMSprop (Hinton, 2012) and the learning rate schedulers constant, step-lr, reduce-lr-on-plateau, and multi-step-lr with their respective hyper-parameters and conducted 100 trials for each combi-nation. All three optimizers achieve comparable losses. So we went ahead with Adam with a reduce-lr-on-plateau scheduler. We noticed that the 9,241-bus-grid needs a smaller learning rate and manually lowered it. For the time series setting on the large grid, we conducted another hyperparameter search. Table 2 and Table 3 show the hyperparameters used in a static setting and for time series. For time series, while reusing previous solutions, we noticed that the solutions are already close and a smaller learning rate is sufficient to learn the delta between time steps. 19 Table 3: Hyperparameter settings for Time Series on IEEE118 with time step t.                        

> IEEE118 t= 0 IEEE118 t > 0
> Optimizer Adam
> Optimizer parameters lr ( η)0.03564 0.00027
> decay ( β)(0 .9802 ,0.9440) (0 .7847 ,0.6624)
> Scheduler Step lr Reduce lr on plateau
> Scheduler parameters
> step 100
> γ0.773
> factor 0.8
> patience 2
> threshold 0.0388
> cooldown 4
> Maximum iterations 1,000 300

6.4. Comparison 

In this section, we compare our DPF to NR and the DC approximation .We test the methods for different use-cases, in particular on individual grids in Section 6.4.1 and on the time series application in Section 6.4.2. We further compare the scalability of DPF and NR in Section 6.4.3 evaluating the approaches for relevant sizes needed in larger continental transmission grids and joint transmission-distribution systems. 

6.4.1. Single-Step Optimization 

We begin with the standard setting of solving individual power-flows on small test grid cases. While this scenario favors second-order methods such as NR due to their fast local convergence, it provides a useful baseline to analyze the behavior and properties of DPF . Here, the traditional NR ap-proach works best (see Figure 3). While our approach converges to a solution that is between NR and the DC-approximation in terms of quality, it takes about 1,000 iterations (about 0.8 s for the IEEE-118 and about 5 s for the larger 9,241-bus grid) on CPU, which is longer than the runtime of NR and DC. Despite the longer runtime for small grids, the runtime for larger grids changes in favor of DPF .This is more apparent when looking at different grid sizes. Figure 4 shows the scaling behavior of our approach compared to NR and DC. The larger 20 Figure 3: Comparison of our Differentiable Simulation (blue), NR (red) and the DC-approximation (green) on CPU without data loading time. Left: the IEEE-118 grid, right: case9241pegase grid. In both cases our differentiable simulation is slower than NR but the solution quality lies between NR and DC. 

Figure 4: Scaling behavior of DPF (braces show the number of iterations), NR and DC. While on CPU (left) the scaling seems similar between the different approaches, on GPU (right) the better scaling behavior becomes apparent. Yet for a grid size of 9,241 NR is still faster, as our gradient-based approach needs about 1,000 iterations in its base form for convergence. 

21 Figure 5: Solution distance of previous solutions (or initialization) to the solution of the next time step for the IEEE-118 grid. Subsequent time-steps have very similar grids, and as a result, very similar solutions. 

the grid, the more iterations of our differentiable simulation are possible. However, even for the largest available grid in the LightSim2grid benchmark tests ( case9241pegase ), NR is still faster. To utilize the scaling behavior more effectively, it is possible to consider multiple power-flow simulations at the same time. 

6.4.2. Time Series Optimization 

One use-case where DPF shows advantages over NR is the time series setting with fixed grids and changing injections. The advantage of DPF is the reusability of approximate solutions, e.g., power-flow solutions of previous time steps. While both NR and DPF are iterative methods, NR cannot fully utilize previous solutions as it still has to calculate the Jacobian matrix. On the other hand, DPF uses many smaller steps to converge to a solution, which can be accelerated with a good initial solution. The grid states of subsequent time steps are similar, and as a consequence, the solutions are close to each other, as shown in Figure 5. Using the simi-larity of solutions from subsequent time-steps we can reduce the number of iterations needed from about 1,000 to 100 iterations in Figure 6. Another advantage of DPF that can be used in a time-series setting but is not exclusive to is the ability to use batching. While NR be used to 22 Figure 6: Training curves for a time series application use case for the IEEE-118 grid. The first time step (left) needs a full fitting of roughly 1,000 iterations. Albeit slow, needs to be performed only once per grid and can possibly be replaced by Newton-Raphson. Subsequent time steps (right), using the first as initial guess, only require 100 iterations to reach a plateau in solution quality. 

iteratively solve the subsequent power-flows one by one (and making use of information from previous time steps such as a similar admittance matrix and a similar Jacobian to reduce the calculation time), DPF uses batching as in Section 4.2 to calculate multiple power-flows at once. Using batching on the 9,241 bus grid we improve the time per power-flow from 2 ms to 0.45 ms 

as shown in Figure 7 for a batch size of 64. 

Comparison to NR. For the time series setting we have shown that batching and reusing previous solutions improves the simulation speed for our method. But we cannot make a fair comparison to NR as LightSim2Grid does not support batching. What we can do, however, is to compare our method to the most optimized version of NR used on time series 5. We ran the experi-ment on our device and found that the optimized version NR for time series for the case9241pegase grid needs 12 .37 ms . This means that by the time NR is finished, our differentiable simulator has finished about 28 iterations, which is not enough to converge. Even for changing grids (and thus chang-ing admittance matrices which DPF can handle as easily as fixed admittance 

> 5https://lightsim2grid .readthedocs .io/en/latest/benchmarks_grid_sizes .html

23 Figure 7: Normalized time per power-flow using batching on the case9241pegase grid. Without batching, a time of about 2 ms per iteration and power-flow is needed while a time of 0.45 ms per iteration and power-flow is achieved at a batch size of 64. 

matrices) NR needs 26 .06 ms which is still faster than DPF (DPF can do about 58 out of 100 iterations in that time). 

6.4.3. Scaling Behavior on Synthetic Data 

The available grids we used (see Section 6.1) are limited to 9,241 or less busses. On these grids, NR outperforms DPF but the scaling appears to be in favor of our approach (see Figure 4). To shed light on this, we compare both methods using synthetic data. In Figure 8 we analyze node and edge scaling. For the node scaling experiment, we increase the grid size by copying the case9241pegase grid and adding a few random connections to connect them. For the edge scal-ing experiment, we add an increasing amount of random connections to the 

case9241pegase grid. Both experiments give a similar result: NR scaling appears to be close to quadratic while DPF scales linearly with the number of nodes and edges. Together with the observation that the solution quality at each iteration is similar (not worse) for larger grid sizes, the node and edge scaling behavior makes DPF a scalable approach. 24 Figure 8: Scaling behavior with respect to grid characteristics. For node scaling (left), we increase the number of nodes in the grid by copying the case9241pegase grid and making few ( 20 ∗ #copies ) random connections throughout the combined grid. In case of edge scaling (right), we insert an increasing amount of random connections to the 

case9241pegase grid, adding two new non-zero entries (due to symmetry) per connection into the Ybus matrix consisting of 37 , 655 non-zero entries. DPF is almost unaffected (rises from 4.7 s to 5.2 s ) while the runtime of NR increases significantly. 

25 6.5. Discussion 

With a differentiable simulation of the power-flow equations, gradient-based optimization techniques can be applied directly to the physical sim-ulation. The primary advantage of DPF lies in its scalability. While NR 

remains highly efficient for small and medium-sized grids, the computational and memory requirements associated with constructing and solving large Ja-cobian matrices increase with system size. In contrast, DPF avoids these expensive matrix factorizations and shows favorable scaling behavior in large networks. As demonstrated in our experiments, DPF eventually surpasses 

NR in convergence speed for sufficiently large systems while maintaining ac-ceptable solution quality. Although classical high-voltage transmission networks alone are often too small to fully exploit this scaling advantage, the situation changes when considering broader system perspectives. The European transmission net-work, for example, contains roughly ten thousand buses as represented by the case9241pegase benchmark grid, while the North American Eastern In-terconnection contains approximately eighty thousand buses (Birchfield and Overbye, 2023). At this scale, NR remains highly efficient. Our results indi-cate that networks with on the order of millions of buses are required for DPF 

to outperform NR on the first run, although this threshold could decrease with further optimization of the method. Such system sizes become realistic when transmission and distribution networks are modeled jointly. This per-spective is increasingly relevant in the context of the renewable energy tran-sition, where distributed generation, electrification, and weather-dependent fluctuations benefit from more detailed system representations. In these set-tings, network sizes can reach tens of millions of nodes. For example, the electrical network in Texas has been estimated to contain approximately 46 million electrical nodes (Mateo et al., 2024), well within the regime where scalable approaches such as DPF become advantageous. Possible future work in this direction is to apply DPF in a fully optimized, parallelized and per-haps distributed manner on larger realistic systems. Beyond its scalability, DPF also offers additional practical benefits. Be-cause the formulation is embedded in a differentiable programming frame-work, it can naturally exploit GPU acceleration and batching of multiple grid states. This makes the approach particularly suitable for applications that require solving many related power-flow problems, such as time-series simulations or N − 1 contingency analyses. While our current implemen-tation does not yet outperform the optimized time-series implementation of 26 LightSim2Grid for small grids, the observed performance gap is relatively small, suggesting that improved implementations could become competitive. Furthermore, gradient-based approaches can contribute to improving the robustness of traditional solvers. NR is known to occasionally fail to converge even with good initialization (Okhuegbe et al., 2024). In such cases, gradient-based methods can serve as stabilizing or initialization procedures, as ex-plored in hybrid approaches combining both techniques (Costilla-Enriquez et al., 2020). Future work should therefore focus on optimizing the implementation of 

DPF , including improved exploitation of sparsity structures, more suitable optimizers and hyperparameters, early stopping strategies, and tighter inte-gration with existing simulation frameworks such as LightSim2Grid . Ad-ditionally, large-scale experiments on realistic transmission–distribution sys-tems could further demonstrate the advantages of the approach. 

7. Conclusion 

This work demonstrates that the differentiable simulation paradigm can be successfully applied to power-flow calculations through the proposed DPF 

formulation. The method preserves the underlying physical equations while enabling gradient-based optimization within modern machine-learning frame-works. The main strength of DPF lies in its scalability. By avoiding explicit Jacobian construction and matrix factorization, the method exhibits favor-able scaling behavior as network size increases. While NR remains the most efficient solver for small and medium-sized transmission grids, DPF becomes increasingly attractive for very large systems where the computational and memory requirements of traditional methods become limiting. This scalabil-ity is particularly relevant for emerging applications that require large and detailed system models, such as joint transmission–distribution simulations. In such contexts, network sizes can reach millions of nodes, making scalable solution approaches essential. Beyond scalability, DPF offers additional practical advantages. The dif-ferentiable formulation allows seamless integration with modern machine-learning infrastructure, including GPU acceleration, batching across multiple simulations, and automatic differentiation frameworks such as PyTorch. This makes the method well suited for applications involving many related power-flow computations, such as time-series simulations and N − 1-contingency 27 analyses. Moreover, DPF can provide intermediate approximate solutions that are more accurate than the widely used DC approximation, enabling efficient screening applications where full convergence is not required. Overall, DPF provides a scalable alternative to classical power-flow solvers. Future work should focus on improving the efficiency and convergence behav-ior of the method, exploring optimized implementations, and deploying it on large realistic power-system models using parallel and distributed computing architectures. 

Acknowledgements 

This work is supported by the Helmholtz AI platform grant and the Helmholtz Association Initiative and Networking Fund on the HAICORE@KIT partition. We credit Assia Benkerroum from flaticon.com for providing the icons in Figure 1. 

Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process. 

Statement: During the preparation of this work, the author(s) used Chat-GPT to assist in the coding process and sparingly to refine the language in the document for unclear parts and explicitly not to generate new content. After using this tool/service, the author(s) reviewed and edited the content as needed and take(s) full responsibility for the content of the published article. 28 References 

Takuya Akiba, Shotaro Sano, Toshihiko Yanase, Takeru Ohta, and Masanori Koyama. Optuna: A next-generation hyperparameter optimization frame-work. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining , pages 2623–2631, 2019. doi: 10 .1145/3292500 .3330701. Shadi G Alawneh, Lei Zeng, and Seyed Ali Arefifar. A review of high-performance computing methods for power flow analysis. Mathematics ,11(11):2461, 2023. doi: 10 .3390/math11112461. Marcin Andrychowicz, Misha Denil, Sergio Gomez, Matthew W. Hoffman, David Pfau, Tom Schaul, Brendan Shillingford, and Nando de Freitas. Learning to learn by gradient descent by gradient descent, 2016. URL 

https://arxiv .org/abs/1606 .04474 .Masoud Barati. Enhancing acpf analysis: Integrating newton-raphson method with gradient descent and computational graphs. IEEE Transac-tions on Industry Applications , 61, 2025. doi: 10 .1109/TIA .2025 .3571862. Atilim Gunes Baydin, Barak A. Pearlmutter, Alexey Andreyevich Radul, and Jeffrey Mark Siskind. Automatic differentiation in machine learning: a survey, 2018. URL https://arxiv .org/abs/1502 .05767 .Adam B Birchfield and Thomas J Overbye. A review on providing real-istic electric grid simulations for academia and industry. Current Sus-tainable/Renewable Energy Reports , 10(3):154–161, 2023. doi: 10 .1007/ s40518-023-00212-7. Luis Böttcher, Hinrikus Wolf, Bastian Jung, Philipp Lutat, Marc Trageser, Oliver Pohl, Xiaohu Tao, Andreas Ulbig, and Martin Grohe. Solving ac power flow with graph neural networks under realistic constraints. In 2023 IEEE Belgrade PowerTech , pages 1–7. IEEE, 2023. doi: 10 .1109/powertech55446 .2023 .10202246. Claire Camus. Outage of french-spanish interconnection on 24 july 2021, 2021. URL https://www .entsoe .eu/news/2021/08/20/outage-of-french-spanish-interconnection-on-24-july-2021-update/ . ac-cessed: 2025-08-20. 29 Spyros Chatzivasileiadis, Damien Ernst, and Göran Andersson. The global grid. Renewable Energy , 57:372–383, 2013. doi: 10 .1016/ j.renene .2013 .01 .032. Hsiao-Dong Chiang, Tao Wang, and Hao Sheng. A novel fast and flexible holomorphic embedding power flow method. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , 33(3):2551–2562, 2017. doi: 10 .1109/TPWRS .2017 .2750711. George F. Corliss. Applications of differentiation arithmetic , page 127–148. Academic Press Professional, Inc., USA, 1988. ISBN 0125056303. Napoleon Costilla-Enriquez, Yang Weng, and Baosen Zhang. Combining newton-raphson and stochastic gradient descent for power flow analysis. 

IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , 36(1):514–517, 2020. doi: 10 .1109/ TPWRS .2020 .3029449. Timothy A Davis and Ekanathan Palamadai Natarajan. Algorithm 907: Klu, a direct sparse solver for circuit simulation problems. ACM Trans-actions on Mathematical Software (TOMS) , 37(3):1–17, 2010. doi: 10 .1145/1824801 .1824814. Pantelis Dogoulis, Karim Tit, and Maxime Cordy. Kclnet: Physics-informed power flow prediction via constraints projections. In Joint European Con-ference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases , pages 95–110. Springer, 2025. doi: 10 .1007/978-3-032-06129-4_6. Benjamin Donnot. Grid2op-a testbed platform to model sequential decision making in power systems, 2020a. URL https://github .com/Grid2Op/ grid2op .Benjamin Donnot. Lightsim2grid - A c++ backend targeting the Grid2Op platform, 2020b. URL https://GitHub .com/Grid2Op/lightsim2grid .Benjamin Donnot, Isabelle Guyon, Marc Schoenauer, Patrick Panciatici, and Antoine Marot. Introducing machine learning for power system operation support, 2017. doi: 10 .48550/arXiv .1709 .09527. Balthazar Donon, Rémy Clément, Benjamin Donnot, Antoine Marot, Isabelle Guyon, and Marc Schoenauer. Neural networks for power flow: Graph neural solver. Electric Power Systems Research , 189:106547, 2020. doi: 10 .1016/j .epsr .2020 .106547. 30 Catarina Demony Emma Pinedo and David Latona. Power begins to return after huge outage hits spain and portugal, 2025. URL 

https://www .reuters .com/world/europe/large-parts-spain-portugal-hit-by-power-outage-2025-04-28/ . accessed: 2025-05-09. Tiffany Fan, Kailai Xu, Jay Pathak, and Eric Darve. Solving inverse problems in steady-state navier-stokes equations using deep neural networks, 2020. URL https://arxiv .org/abs/2008 .13074 .Meriem Fikri, Touria Haidi, Bouchra Cheddadi, Omar Sabri, Meriem Ma-jdoub, and Abdelaziz Belfqih. Power flow calculations by deterministic methods and artificial intelligence method. Int J Adv Eng Res Sci , 5: 148–152, 2018. doi: 10 .22161/ijaers .5.6.25. Katharina Flügel, Daniel Coquelin, Marie Weiel, Charlotte Debus, Achim Streit, and Markus Götz. Beyond backpropagation: Optimization with multi-tangent forward gradients. In 2025 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) , page 1–8. IEEE, June 2025. doi: 10 .1109/ ijcnn64981 .2025 .11227446. Guillaume Garrigos and Robert M. Gower. Handbook of convergence theorems for (stochastic) gradient methods, 2024. doi: 10 .48550/ arXiv .2301 .11235. Juan S Giraldo, Oscar Danilo Montoya, Pedro P Vergara, and Federico Mi-lano. A fixed-point current injection power flow for electric distribution systems using laurent series. Electric Power Systems Research , 211:108326, 2022. doi: 10 .1016/j .epsr .2022 .108326. John J Grainger. Power system analysis . McGraw-Hill, 1999. ISBN 1259008355. Hendrik F. Hamann, Blazhe Gjorgiev, Thomas Brunschwiler, Leonardo S.A. Martins, Alban Puech, Anna Varbella, Jonas Weiss, Juan Bernabe-Moreno, Alexandre Blondin Massé, Seong Lok Choi, Ian Foster, Bri-Mathias Hodge, Rishabh Jain, Kibaek Kim, Vincent Mai, François Mi-rallès, Martin De Montigny, Octavio Ramos-Leaños, Hussein Suprême, Le Xie, El-Nasser S. Youssef, Arnaud Zinflou, Alexander Belyi, Ricardo J. Bessa, Bishnu Prasad Bhattarai, Johannes Schmude, and Stanislav 31 Sobolevsky. Foundation models for the electric power grid. Joule , 8(12): 3245–3258, 2024. ISSN 2542-4351. doi: 10 .1016/j .joule .2024 .11 .002. Geoffrey Hinton. rmsprop: Divide the gradient by a running average of its recent magnitude, 2012. URL https://www .cs .toronto .edu/~tijmen/ csc321/slides/lecture_slides_lec6 .pdf .Kaiyang Huang and Kai Sun. A review on applications of holomor-phic embedding methods. IEnergy , 2(4):264–274, 2023. doi: 10 .23919/ IEN .2023 .0037. Reijer Idema, Georgios Papaefthymiou, Domenico Lahaye, Cornelis Vuik, and Lou van der Sluis. Towards faster solution of large power flow prob-lems. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , 28:4918–4925, 2013. doi: 10 .1109/TPWRS .2013 .2252631. Cédric Josz, Stéphane Fliscounakis, Jean Maeght, and Patrick Panciatici. Ac power flow data in matpower and qcqp format: itesla, rte snapshots, and pegase, 2016. doi: 10 .48550/arXiv .1603 .01533. Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic opti-mization, 2017. doi: 10 .48550/arXiv .1412 .6980. Pavel Komarov, Floris van Breugel, and J. Nathan Kutz. A taxonomy of numerical differentiation methods, 2025. URL https://arxiv .org/abs/ 2512 .09090 .Soeren Laue. On the equivalence of automatic and symbolic differentiation, 2022. URL https://arxiv .org/abs/1904 .02990 .Gerardo Lemos, Ana Melgar, Mauricio Torres, and Michael Rios. State of emergency declared after blackout plunges most of chile into darknes, 2021. URL https://edition .cnn .com/2025/02/25/americas/chile-blackout-14-regions-intl-latam . accessed: 2025-08-20. Milad Leyli Abadi, Antoine Marot, Jérôme Picault, David Danan, Mouadh Yagoubi, Benjamin Donnot, Seif Attoui, Pavel Dimitrov, Asma Farjallah, and Clement Etienam. Lips-learning industrial physical simulation benchmark suite. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , 35:28095–28109, 2022. URL https://proceedings .neurips .cc/ 

32 paper_files/paper/2022/hash/b3ac9866f6333beaa7d38926101b7e1c-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks .html .Junbang Liang and Ming C Lin. Differentiable physics simulation. In ICLR 2020 workshop on integration of deep neural models and differential equa-tions , 2020. URL https://openreview .net/pdf?id=p-SG2KFY2 .Carlos Mateo, Fernando Postigo, Tarek Elgindy, Adam B Birchfield, Pablo Dueñas, Bryan Palmintier, Nadia Panossian, Tomás Gómez, Fernando de Cuadra, Thomas J Overbye, et al. Building and validating a large-scale combined transmission & distribution synthetic electricity system of texas. International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems , 159: 110037, 2024. doi: 10 .1016/j .ijepes .2024 .110037. Parag Mitra, Vijay Vittal, Brian Keel, and Jeni Mistry. A systematic ap-proach to n-1-1 analysis for power system security assessment. IEEE Power and Energy Technology Systems Journal , 3(2):71–80, 2016. doi: 10 .1109/JPETS .2016 .2546282. Rhys Newbury, Jack Collins, Kerry He, Jiahe Pan, Ingmar Posner, David Howard, and Akansel Cosgun. A review of differentiable simulators. IEEE Access , pages 97581–97604, 2024. doi: 10 .1109/ACCESS .2024 .3425448. John Nickolls, Ian Buck, Michael Garland, and Kevin Skadron. Scalable parallel programming with cuda: Is cuda the parallel programming model that application developers have been waiting for? Queue , 6(2):40–53, 2008. doi: 10 .1145/1401132 .1401152. Samuel N Okhuegbe, Adedasola A Ademola, and Yilu Liu. A machine learn-ing initializer for newton-raphson ac power flow convergence. In 2024 IEEE Texas Power and Energy Conference (TPEC) , pages 1–6. IEEE, 2024. doi: 10 .1109/TPEC60005 .2024 .10472261. Darren Orf. The power grid is the largest machine in the world, and our nation’s greatest engineering achievement, 2023. URL 

https://www .popularmechanics .com/science/energy/a44067133/ how-does-the-power-grid-work/ . accessed: 2024-07-29. Michael Overton. Quadratic convergence of newton’s method. Technical report, New York University, 2017. URL https://cs .nyu .edu/~overton/ NumericalComputing/newton .pdf .33 Max Pargmann, Jan Ebert, Markus Götz, Daniel Maldonado Quinto, Robert Pitz-Paal, and Stefan Kesselheim. Automatic heliostat learning for in situ concentrating solar power plant metrology with differentiable ray trac-ing. Nature Communications , 15(1):6997, 2024. doi: 10 .1038/s41467-024-51019-z. Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. Ivonne Pena, Carlo Brancucci Martinez-Anido, and Bri-Mathias Hodge. An extended ieee 118-bus test system with high renewable penetra-tion. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , 33(1):281–289, 2017. doi: 10 .1109/TPWRS .2017 .2695963. Yingying Qi, Di Shi, and Daniel Tylavsky. Impact of assumptions on dc power flow model accuracy. In 2012 North American Power Symposium (NAPS) , pages 1–6. IEEE, 2012. doi: 10 .1109/NAPS .2012 .6336395. Sebastian Ruder. An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms, 2017. Patrick S Sauter, Christian A Braun, Mathias Kluwe, and Soren Hohmann. Comparison of the holomorphic embedding load flow method with estab-lished power flow algorithms and a new hybrid approach. In 2017 Ninth Annual IEEE Green Technologies Conference (GreenTech) , pages 203–210. IEEE, 2017. doi: 10 .1109/GreenTech .2017 .36. Brian Stott and Ongun Alsac. Fast decoupled load flow. IEEE trans-actions on power apparatus and systems , pages 859–869, 2007. doi: 10 .1109/TPAS .1974 .293985. Brian Stott, Jorge Jardim, and Ongun Alsaç. Dc power flow revisited. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , 24(3):1290–1300, 2009. doi: 10 .1109/ TPWRS .2009 .2021235. 34 Leon Thurner, Alexander Scheidler, Florian Schäfer, Jan-Hendrik Menke, Ju-lian Dollichon, Friederike Meier, Steffen Meinecke, and Martin Braun. pan-dapower—an open-source python tool for convenient modeling, analysis, and optimization of electric power systems. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , 33(6):6510–6521, 2018. doi: 10 .1109/TPWRS .2018 .2829021. William. F. Tinney and Clifford E. Hart. Power flow solution by newton’s method. IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems , PAS-86 (11):1449–1460, 1967. doi: 10 .1109/TPAS .1967 .291823. Antonio Trias. The holomorphic embedding load flow method. In 2012 IEEE power and energy society general meeting , pages 1–8. IEEE, 2012. doi: 10 .1109/PESGM .2012 .6344759. He Zhang. Higher-order automatic differentiation using symbolic differential algebra: Bridging the gap between algorithmic and symbolic differentia-tion, 2025. URL https://arxiv .org/abs/2506 .00796 .35 Table A.4: LightSim2Grid times on our device in ms . Compared are times of power-flows for changing grids with and without recycling (RC), power-flows for fixed grids on time series (TS) and times for contingency analysis (TS). The runtime scaling appears to be between linear and quadratic. The fastest times are achieved for time series as the grid (and therefore the admittance matrix and the sparsity structure of the Jacobian) stays the same and can be reused. 

Power-flow times using NR in ms 

Grid Size RC No RC TS CA 

case14 14 0.0204 0.0491 0.00790 0.0171 

case118 118 0.1180 0.3206 0.0506 0.0746 

case_illinois200 200 0.2447 0.5842 0.1032 0.1705 

case300 300 0.4501 0.9606 0.2521 0.3341 

case1354pegase 1,354 2.3303 4.0754 1.2324 1.5423 

case1888rte 1,888 3.6692 5.9012 1.6169 2.059 

case2848rte 2,848 5.6715 9.093 2.447 3.1987 

case2869pegase 2,869 5.4858 9.443 2.9107 3.42051 

case3120sp 3,120 6.371 10.155 2.307 3.5356 

case6495rte 6,495 17.6517 25.9042 7.53377 8.6814 

case6515rte 6,515 20.3695 28.8332 7.3132 8.77377 

case9241pegase 9,241 26.0554 41.0947 12.3748 14.0037 

Appendix Appendix A. Baseline 

Table A.4 shows the power-flow runtime using the NR baseline when running LightSim2Grid code. It is notable that the runtime appears to be between linear and quadratic and not cubic. 

Appendix B. Pseudocode of DPF and NR 

Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 show pseudo-code for our method ( DPF )and the baseline method NR as it is implemented. 36 Algorithm 1 Pseudocode for our DPF method. Lines 22-26 calculate a loss from the power-balance equation which is used to update the voltages at lines 27-29 by using an optimizer and scheduler. 

1: Hyperparameters 

2: optimizer optimizer with own hyperparameters 

3: scheduler scheduler with own hyperparameters 

4: loss loss function 

5: 6: Inputs 

7: n number of active buses 

8: V ∈ Cn voltages V = |V | ∗ eiθ with θ, |V | ∈ Rn

9: Ybus ∈ Cnxn Admittance Matrix 

10: Sbus ∈ Cn Injection Vector 

11: pv index list of PV-buses 

12: pq index list of PQ-buses 

13: slack index of slack bus 

14: tol tolerance for convergence check 

15: 16: Start 

17: V = |V |eiθ ← ones ▷ Initialization 

18: |V |learnable = |V |[pq ]

19: θlearnable = θ[pv, pq ]

20: 21: for i=1 until max_iter do 

22: | Scalc = Pcalc + iQ calc ← V (Ybus V )∗

23: | out = [ Pcalc [pv, pq ], Q calc [pq ]] ▷ Forward Pass 

24: | target = [ P [pv, pq ], Q [pq ]] 

25: |

26: | loss = M SE (out, target )

27: | loss.backward () ▷ Only update learnable parameters 

28: | optimizer.step () 

29: | scheduler.step () 

30: | if loss < tol then 

31: | | return |V |eiθ 

32: | end if 

33: end for 

34: return |V |eiθ 

37 Algorithm 2 NR method for power-flow calculations (LightSim2Grid (Don-not, 2020b)). Every iteration a linearization is done with the Jacobian (line 22) containing the partial derivatives (lines 20-21). If the power mismatch is too large (lines 13-16, 26-29), the voltage vector is updated by the voltage delta that creates a power delta (under the Jacobian) to balance out the power mismatch (line 23). 

1: Inputs 

2: n number of active buses 

3: V ∈ Cn voltages V = |V | ∗ eiθ with angles and magnitudes θ, |V | ∈ Rn

4: Ybus ∈ Cnxn Admittance Matrix 

5: Sbus ∈ Cn Injection Vector 

6: pv index list of PV-buses 

7: pq index list of PQ-buses 

8: slack index of slack bus 

9: tol tolerance for convergence check 

10: 11: Start 

12: V = |V |eiθ ← DC-power-flow ▷ Initialization 

13: Scalc ← V (Ybus V )∗

14: Pcalc , Q calc ← Re (Scalc ), Im (Scalc )

15: f (|V |, θ ) ← [( Pcalc − P )[ pvpq ], (Qcalc − Q)[ pq ]] T ▷ Evaluate power mismatch 

16: if f (|V |, θ ) < tol then ▷ Update local best solution 

17: | return V

18: end if 

19: for i=1 until max_iter do 

20: | ∂S calc i  

> ∂|V|j

←

     

> ViY∗
> bus ij V∗
> j
> |Vj|

, for i̸ = j 

> Vi
> |Vi|

I∗ 

> i

+ ViY ∗    

> bus ij V∗
> j
> |Vj|

, for i = j

 ▷ Partial derivatives 

21: | ∂S calc i 

> ∂θ j

←

(−iV iY ∗ 

> bus ij

V ∗ 

> j

, for i̸ = jiV iI∗ 

> i

− iV iY ∗ 

> bus ij

V ∗ 

> j

, for i = j

)

22: | Jf ← 

> ∂P calc
> ∂θ

[pvpq, pvpq ] ∂P calc   

> |V|

[pvpq, pq ] 

> ∂Q calc
> ∂θ

[pq, pvpq ] ∂Q calc   

> |V|

[pq, pq ]

!

▷ Determine Jacobian 

23: |

θ[pvpq ]

|V |[pq ]



←

θ[pvpq ]

|V |[pq ]



− J−1 

> f

f (|V |, θ ) ▷ Newton-step using linear solver 

24: | Scalc ← V (Ybus V )∗

25: | Pcalc , Q calc ← Re (Scalc ), Im (Scalc )

26: | f (|V |, θ ) ← [( Pcalc − P )[ pvpq ], (Qcalc − Q)[ pq ]] T ▷ Power mismatch 

27: | if f (|V |, θ ) < tol then ▷ Update local best solution 

28: | | return V = |V |eiθ 

29: | end if 

30: end for 

31: return V = |V |eiθ 

38