Title: Impact of Inverter-Based Resources on the Protection of the Electrical Grid

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.27816v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 01:40:00 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
> IEEE/IAS 62ND INDUSTRIAL & COMMERCIAL POWER SYSTEMS TECHNICAL CONFERENCE, MAY 2026 1

# Impact of Inverter-Based Resources on the Protection of the Electrical Grid 

John Slane 1 and Adam Mate 1,2

Abstract —In recent years, the contribution of renewable en-ergy resources to the electrical grid has increased drastically; the most common of these are photovoltaic solar panels and wind turbines. These resources rely on inverters to interface with the grid, which do not inherently exhibit the same fault characteristics as synchronous generators. Consistently, they can strain grid reliability and security, cause increased number of blackouts, and, in some cases, allow relatively minor faults to turn into cascading failures. Solar and wind energy provide benefits and can support grid stability; however, several challenges and gaps in understanding must be explored and addressed before this can be realized. This paper provides a comprehensive literature review of grid codes, modeling techniques, and tools, as well as current methods for responding to various faults. It also presents an overview of the industry’s state as it relates to grid fault response in the presence of inverter-based resources. 

Index Terms —inverter-based resources, power system protec-tion, inverter faults, grid modeling and simulation, power system reliability 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Grid faults occur when a portion of the electrical grid is unexpectedly disrupted. This may result from equipment failure, damage to infrastructure caused by weather or other natural phenomena, or malicious attacks. When a fault occurs, several things can happen: protection devices (such as circuit breakers) may open or close to reroute power around the faulted area; generators may adjust to account for any change in generation or demand; and grid operators may dispatch repair crews. The electrical grid was designed and built on the premise that energy is provided primarily (or entirely) by synchronous generators (SGs). The stability, control, and reliability of the grid have traditionally been established by the frequency control, inertia, and voltage regulation of SGs, with fault protection devices, practices, and tools designed around an SG-driven grid. Today, energy sources that do not use SGs are becoming far more common, including photovoltaic (PV) solar, wind, and battery storage; these are collectively referred to as inverter-based resources (IBRs). When the share of IBRs on an electrical grid relative to SGs is low, the impact may be small enough that traditional protection practices remain adequate. However, as the IBRs-to-SGs ratio increases, protection practices become insufficient to manage faults, and grid reliability and security declines. 

Manuscript submitted: Jan. 9, 2026. Current version: Mar. 21, 2026.  

> 1

The authors are with the Norm Asbjornson College of Engineering at Montana State University, Bozeman MT. Emails: johnslane@montana.edu and adam.mate@montana.edu.  

> 2

The author is with the Analytics Intelligence and Technology Division at Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos NM 87545. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at https://ieeexplore.ieee.org. 

A primary example is how SGs provide inertia to help stabilize the electrical grid. SGs are rotating generators with inertia relative to their mass. If a fault takes a generator offline, the inertia of the remaining SGs keeps them spinning for a short interval, giving the system time to replace the generation lost. IBRs, by contrast, do not have the same built-in inertia. Consequently, on a grid with a high share of IBRs, if a generator were to fail, there may be a gap between when the generator fails and new generation is brought up to replace it. During that gap, there would not be enough generation to meet the load, potentially causing blackouts [1], [2]. Solutions exist for the lack of kinetic inertia in IBRs. IBRs can react to control inputs far more quickly than SGs, as such, fast frequency response can allow them to respond to faults almost instantaneously. IBRs can also be equipped with synthetic inertia, emulating the inertial response of SGs, and several control schemes have been developed to compensate for the absence of inertia [2], [3]. The key point is that as IBRs replace SGs, there will be less inertia to help buffer against faults, and it will become more important that IBRs be designed to so that grid reliability and security is maintained, or even improved. Events have already been observed in which grid faults were tied to the increasing penetration of IBRs. In 2016, a fire in Southern California caused several faults to register on the transmission network over the course of several hours. Multiple IBRs responded to those faults by automatically tripping offline; they re-energized within a few seconds, but even that brief disruption resulted in cascading failures and a blackout [4]. These early incidents underscore the need to examine how IBRs behave under fault conditions. In 2025, a cascading failure caused a system-wide blackout affecting all of Spain, Portugal, and parts of France. The root cause is still under investigation at the time of writing; however, the first generators to go offline were several wind and solar units in Spain, followed shortly by a surge in load on distribution networks that appears to be linked to rooftop solar generators going offline [5]. Although investigations are ongoing, the event already suggests that a better understanding of IBR fault response would benefit the blackout investigation and help implement changes to prevent similar events in the future. IBRs are a relatively new technology, so their impact on electrical grids is not yet as well understood as that of SGs. At the same time, as demand for reliable electricity grows and alternative energy becomes increasingly affordable, the share of IBRs is expected to grow rapidly. This paper reviews the current protection systems and practices that have been developed for grid fault response in networks with high IBR penetration.  

> arXiv:2603.27816v1 [eess.SY] 29 Mar 2026 IEEE/IAS 62ND INDUSTRIAL & COMMERCIAL POWER SYSTEMS TECHNICAL CONFERENCE, MAY 2026 2

The contributions of this paper include the following: Section II provides a brief technology background on the functionality of protection devices and DC/AC inverters for IBRs; Section III reviews current grid codes related to IBR protection; Section IV reviews grid models, including common modeling practices and industry tools; Section V reviews literature for specific grid fault conditions and how IBRs respond to those faults, as well as the high-level overall directions observed; and Section VI summarizes key findings and potential for future work. By examining the impact of IBRs on protection systems— taking into account the requirements, modeling tools, and rele-vant literature—this paper provides a comprehensive, system-level overview of grid fault conditions. As more and more IBRs are introduced, this paper will serve as a starting point to help industry professionals to avoid costly oversights and provide a stepping-stone for future research aimed at a more reliable and secure electrical grid. II. T ECHNOLOGY BACKGROUND 

A. Protection Systems 

Standard protection devices include circuit breakers and relays. Circuit breakers are switches that remain closed, unless a sufficiently large current is detected, at which point they trip open. Rather than only tripping due to overcurrent, circuit breakers may be controlled by relays. Most circuit breakers are reclosers: when a fault current is detected, they open, remain open, and then automatically reclose after a few grid cycles (on the order of milliseconds). In case the fault current is still detected after reclosure, they open and reclose again; however, after a handful of times (given the fault current persists), they remain open until after the faulted condition is addressed and an operator resets them. The reclosing function prevents circuit breakers from tripping and remaining open in the event of transient or sub-transient current spikes. Relays have significantly more control and can be designed to trip a circuit breaker for various conditions. Overcurrent relays operate much like standard circuit breakers, however, the tripping current can be defined with precision. Voltage relays trip when an anomalous voltage is detected. Distance relays, or impedance relays, detect both current and voltage, and respond to the voltage-to-current ratio—the voltage-to-current ratio, at a specific location on the grid, changes as a result of how far the fault is from the relay, therefore, these relays can be designed to trip for faults that occur at specific distances away. Differential relays compare the voltage or current between two locations on the grid, often two phases of a power line, and trip when that difference reaches a threshold; these relays are used to detect unbalanced faults. More complicated relays (based on frequency detection, phase detection, or phase differential) exist as well, or others that can be designed to respond to specific AC signal shapes. [6] Certain relays, in particular distance relays, can be pro-grammed to respond to well-defined fault conditions. The responses of SGs to many types of faults, especially to the most common ones (such as shorts), is well understood, therefore, the tripping thresholds can be set accordingly. Dis-tance relays commonly use “fault-type classification” (FTC) to determine the fault type based on either the voltage phase angle differences per phase or the current magnitude differ-ences of symmetric components [7]. IBRs have different fault characteristics than SGs, which, if not taken into account, may result in relays not tripping open when a fault occurs, or misidentifying faults [8]. 

B. Inverter-Based Resources 

IBRs rely on power electronics to digitally transform the electric signal from DC to AC. The simplest and most fre-quently used technology is current controlled inverters, also called as grid following inverters (GFLIs). GFLIs regulate the input DC voltage and use switching transistors and pulse width modulation (PWM) to control the output AC current at the point of common coupling (PCC); they track the phase angle of the grid to achieve phase loop lock (PLL), then adjust the current to match the grid phase at the PCC and maximize generation. GFLIs are unable to function without a grid signal to track, and have very limited ability to benefit grid stability— as the ratio of IBRs to SGs shifts in favor of IBRs, grid stability is becoming more challenging to maintain. Solutions have been developed to allow GFLIs to help maintain grid stability during transient events, such as implementing a time delay to the control loop that allows them to continue operating through short-duration faults, as well as introducing pseudo-inertia to the grid[9] A newer but far less frequently used technology is voltage controlled inverters, also called as grid forming inverters (GFMIs). GFMIs regulate the input DC current and use PWM to adjust the output AC voltage; the benefit is that they can continue to generate an AC signal even when disconnected from the grid, such as during grid failures. In the event of faults, GFMIs are able to help regulate voltage and frequency, and can benefit the grid in terms of withstanding and/or recovering from faults; however, they trade off the ability to maximize their power output [10]. GFMIs are mostly seen on microgrids—either on test systems or real world electrical grids, such as on the island of Kauai, Hawaii—where implementing a newer technology has more flexibility and less potential for negative impacts [11]. Inverters may respond to faulted conditions in a range of ways, which can be grouped by their modes of operation. During normal operation, GFLIs and GFMIs function based on the control methodologies outlined above. When a fault is detected (as in voltage, frequency, or current is being outside of nominal operating bounds), the inverter may switch to fault-ride-through (FRT) mode: it will continue to supply power, but may use a different control paradigm to support grid stability and recovery. In case grid conditions are outside of FRT bounds, an inverter may enter current blocking mode (also known as momentary cessation), in which it stops outputting current, but does not ramp down power generation, meanwhile it is continuously reading grid conditions, so that once the grid is within acceptable bounds, it can nearly instantaneously reconnect and continue to output power. Finally, in case grid IEEE/IAS 62ND INDUSTRIAL & COMMERCIAL POWER SYSTEMS TECHNICAL CONFERENCE, MAY 2026 3

conditions are too far beyond acceptable bounds or have been outside of acceptable bounds for a sufficient amount of time, an inverter may trip offline, at which point it disconnects from the grid and the IBR generator stops generating power. GFMIs have another operating mode, islanded mode: in the event of a loss of signal from the grid, rather than going offline, an inverter can disconnect from the main grid, but continue to provide power to a set number of loads, thereby forming a microgrid [12], [13]. It must be noted that inverters are much more sensitive to thermal damage as a result of overcurrent than SGs; as a result, inverters have built-in current limits to protect internal components. SGs often have a current spike of 5pu or more when a fault occurs, whereas, due to thermal protection, an inverter may only have a current spike of 2pu or less. Many protection devices rely on a spike in current to indicate that a fault has occurred, therefore, the lower current response of an IBR is a primary reason for protection devices to fail to engage in the event of a fault [14]. III. G RID CODE 

Multiple standards have been written over the years; some are requirements by governments for their electrical grids, others are best practices by organizations without govern-ing authority. The International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) is an international body—IEC releases standards to sup-port any grid operating entity internationally; typically, these standards cover a wider scope than other organizations’, but with less specificity. The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) is a technical organization across a broad scope of disciplines and industries—IEEE has several lower-level bodies that write and manage specific standards; while they do not have authority to enforce standards, their guidance are widely accepted as best practice and often adopted into grid requirements. The North American Electrical Reliability Corporation (NERC) oversees sub-organizations in Canada, the United States of America, and parts of Mexico, which are directly answerable to those governments—NERC sets and enforces standards for the North American grid, subject to the approval of its sub-organizations; in the United States, its sub-organization is the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), which is directly answerable to the United States Congress. For the German electrical grid, the “German Grid Code” is the standard that governs system operators—this code has been more proactive than most other grid requirements and standards set by organizations in terms of enacting re-quirements for IBR response to fault conditions. 

A. International Electrotechnical Commission 

IEC has published two technical reports related to IBR response to fault conditions: IEC/TR 63401 Dynamic Charac-teristics of Inverter-Based Resources in Bulk Power Systems ,and IEC/TS 63389 Developing a Profile Composed of a Set of Basic Application Profiles of IEC 61850 for Distributed Energy Resource Compliant to IEEE 1547 . These reports are sometimes referenced in relation to IBR operation on electrical grids, however, they in turn reference IEEE standards while typically being less detailed than those. 

B. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers IEEE Std 1547 Standard for Interconnection and Inter-operability of Distributed Energy Resources with Associated Electric Power Systems Interfaces —first published in 2003, then has gone through multiple revisions with the latest version being published in 2018—applies to distributed energy resources (DERs) that are defined as “ source of electric power that is not directly connected to a bulk power system ,” which typically are IBRs in a distribution network [15]. The Energy Policy Act of 2005 [16] set IEEE Std 1547 as the United States national standard. Iterations introduced sections on cy-bersecurity, testing (to ensure that standards are appropriately met), and background studies (on where the set standards came from); however, the most important section for IBR fault protection is Section 6, which outlines different voltage and frequency ranges at the PCC and defines required responses. Figure 1, taken over from IEEE Std 1547, shows the table of zones for voltage ranges of DER IBRs. The first (nominal) operating region is the Continuous Operation mode, where the IBR provides optimal power at nominal voltage and frequency. Just outside of this is the Permissive Operation region, where the IBR must either be in Momentary Cessation mode or Mandatory Operation mode. In Momentary Cessation mode, the IBR disconnects from the grid, but does not cease current output; during this mode, the IBR will continuously attempt to re-acquire PLL, at which point it can almost immediately begin outputting current to the grid again. In Mandatory Operation mode, the IBR is required to continue to provide active and/or reactive power to the grid; unlike other more recent electric codes, IEEE Std 1547 does not specify the type of power (active and/or reactive) that the IBR is to supply during over-voltage or under-voltage events, however, for under-frequency events it does specify that the IBR shall continue to provide a minimum amount of active power. Should the voltage or frequency at the PCC go low or high enough to be outside of these regions, the requirement for the IBR is to cease to energize. Regardless of voltage at the PCC, some specific instances (such as when a phase is open at the PCC) require the IBR to trip. 

IEEE Std 2800 Standard for Interconnection and In-teroperability of Inverter-Based Resources Interconnecting with Associated Transmission Electric Power Systems —published in 2022—is the transmission network equivalent of IEEE Std 1547; however, it is not required to be adapted by system operators in the United States, unless the local or state governing body (in which the transmission network is being operated) mandates it [17]. Section 7 outlines standards for fault response of IBRs on transmission networks, using the conventions of IEEE Std 1547 (i.e., defining Continuous and Permissive Operation regions), but with two important differences: (1) when outside of all defined regions, rather than requiring an IBR to cease to operate, IEEE Std 2800 states that the IBR “may ride through or may trip”; and (2) the expectation for the type of power to be provided while in FRT mode is for balanced faults, the IBR is to inject positive sequence current with reactive current priority (though the method for allocating reactive and active power is not IEEE/IAS 62ND INDUSTRIAL & COMMERCIAL POWER SYSTEMS TECHNICAL CONFERENCE, MAY 2026 4 

> Fig. 1. IEEE Std 1547-2018, Table 14 – Fault-Ride-Through [15]

specified), while for unbalanced faults, the IBR is to inject negative sequence current that is proportional to the PCC voltage (per unit) and that leads PCC voltage by 90-to-100 degrees. Both IEEE Std 1547 and IEEE Std 2800 define operating ranges for IBRs. Continuous Operation Region (COR) is the standard, steady-state operating mode, in which voltage and frequency are within a set range. If voltage and/or frequency deviate(s) from this range, there is a Mandatory Operation Region (MOR), in which IBRs are required to continue to provide power, but may (or in some cases must) go into FRT mode. If voltage and/or frequency are outside of the MOR, there is a Permissive Operation Region, in which IBRs are required to continue operation, but may go into current blocking mode for a set amount of time. 

C. North American Electrical Reliability Corporation 

Before introducing new requirements and standards, NERC always seeks approval from FERC and other relevant orga-nizations. At present, NERC has three requirements in work, though not yet enforceable, concerning IBR fault protection [13]: PRC-028-1 Disturbance Monitoring and Reporting Re-quirements for Inverter-Based Resources , which will require IBR systems to monitor and record data for grid faults; PRC-029-1 Frequency and Voltage Ride-through Requirements for Inverter-based Resources , which sets requirements based on IEEE Std 2800, with identical operating regions and timing; and PRC-030-1 Unexpected Inverter-Based Resource Event Mitigation , which sets requirements for IBRs on both trans-mission and distribution networks to identify and record any unexpected loss of power of sufficient magnitude and duration, that is “at least 20 MW and at least 10% of the plant’s gross nameplate rating, occurring within a 4 second period”. 

D. Grid Code Considerations 

The above discussed grid codes almost exclusively refer to stead-state or transient response to a fault. As mentioned earlier, inverters limit current output to protect themselves, however, during a fault, the sub-transient response can have a much higher current spike, which is emitted to the grid before the inverter controls limit the current—the effects of sub-transient inverter fault response is explored more in Section V. Grid codes generally do not differentiate between GFLIs and GFMIs, however, they do not include any standards for inverters switching to or from islanding mode. Grid codes often include exceptions for system owners to set their own practices for IBR fault response. For example, IEEE Std 2800 

Section 7.2.2.3.2 Low- and High-Voltage Ride-Through Ca-pability states: “If requested by the [transmission network] owner, and mutually agreed with the IBR owner, the IBR unit may operate in active current priority mode for both the high-and low-voltage ride-through events.” While similar statements and guidance in standards provide more flexibility for system owners and operators to employ protections that work best for them, it also allows for more variety in possible IBR responses to grid faults. Even though other requirements and standards exist, the above outlined grid codes, particularly the IEEE standards, are the most well-established best practices for grid operation. To date, very few grid entities or legislative bodies have set enforceable requirements to IBR fault response. IV. G RID MODELS 

Electric utilities use modeling and simulation software tools for fault analysis to demonstrate compliance with legal requirements. Both IEEE and NERC have requirements for IBR owners to share their models with the utility they are connected to. It is common to provide a model in the form of a dynamic-link library (DLL) file, containing code and data that multiple software can use simultaneously, which provides the IBR terminal currents given various grid voltage and frequency conditions. Aside from direction on how IBRs are expected to respond to different grid conditions, no standard exists on what specific IBR control techniques should be followed. In fact, inverter manufacturers each use their own intellectual property for control systems, which often change between IBR models; as such, a grid with 10 IBRs may have different control algorithms on each inverter. IBRs must be tested before they can be connected to the electrical grid. Validation tests ensure functionality and that grid requirements are met, and verify that protection devices IEEE/IAS 62ND INDUSTRIAL & COMMERCIAL POWER SYSTEMS TECHNICAL CONFERENCE, MAY 2026 5

function; however, these tests do not include fault testing for all fault conditions. Not only would that be an overly cumbersome task, it would also be impossible to completely verify IBR response for all possible fault conditions. In many cases, fault requirements can be verified through modeling and simulation. IEEE Std 2800 notes that all models have simplifications and approximations: e.g., a PV array is rarely modeled down to each individual inverter within an IBR plant, rather the entire plant is modeled as a single generator. In practice, it is possible for individual IBRs within a plant to respond differently: when a specific fault condition occur, some IBRs may trip while others do not. OpenDSS 1 is a widely used software tool, developed by the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), with built-in fault analysis capability. A User can construct or import a model, define a fault condition—a fault object is an impedance object connected to either two nodes or a single node and ground— and receive either “snapshot” (i.e., single point in time) or dynamic current and voltage conditions given that fault. IBRs may be modeled to reflect control modes, such as current limiting and reactive or active current priority (which may be required by code as a capability). Settings have limitations, such as considering an IBR system to be a single IBR instead of an array of IBRs feeding a collector, as is common— this may also oversimplify the control response of an IBR system (which, depending on conditions, may have more than one FRT or off-nominal control mode) or may not take into account dynamic conditions that cause an IBR to repeatedly enter and exit different control modes (introducing harmonics or unexpected grid conditions by continuously transitioning into and out of different control modes). OpenDSS can import a DLL file and is capable of modeling both GFLIs and GFMIs; however, documentation suggests that GFMI models only be used for islanded microgrids. The Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) of the US Department of Energy (DOE) has developed a series of tools for grid analysis under their InfrastructureModels.jl software ecosystem. These open-source frameworks are built using the Julia programming language: PowerModels.jl 2 (PMs) is for steady-state power transmission network optimization; PowerModelsDistribution.jl 3 (PMsD), an extension of PMs, is specialized for distribution networks; and PowerModelsProtec-tion.jl 4 (PMsP) is a fault study tool for use with either PMs or PMsD. PMsP allows to model generators as GFLIs or GFMIs: GFLIs are modeled with PQ control and include positive sequence current injection constraints—it does not appear to include options for GFLI negative sequence current injection that is now required by certain grid codes—while GFMIs use a current limiting model and may be defined with droop control. PMsP models SGs as a voltage source with an impedance; the sub-transient impedance is used. For IBRs, a virtual impedance is used, though it does not differentiate between sub-transient and transient impedance; this is significant for IBRs since transient current is limited to the saturation current of the 

> 1https://opendss.epri.com/
> 2https://github.com/lanl-ansi/PowerModels.jl
> 3https://github.com/lanl-ansi/PowerModelsDistribution.jl
> 4https://github.com/lanl-ansi/PowerModelsProtection.jl

inverter, but sub-transient current is only limited by the true internal impedance. Although PMsP only has a limited range of modeling options, Users may take advantage of its open-source nature and introduce additional custom control logics. Typically, an IBR owner generates a DLL file that defines inverter output parameters given possible input parameters. Grid operators import these DLL files into their fault analysis tools without having to completely model inverters. As the share of IBRs on the grid continues to grow, and as inverter control techniques become more diverse and more compli-cated, currently held assumptions on the validity of models and simulation results will no longer hold true or will result in lower grid reliability [18]. A major difficulty in modeling the fault response of inverters is the non-linearity of the control systems, which requires IBRs’ parameters to be modeled with respect to time. Tra-ditional load-flow models are not time-dependent but state-dependent, which is much more efficient for computers to solve and less prone to error. Plet et al. (2010) [14] proposed a strategy to predict the fault response in a grid with many IBRs (not just a single generating unit fault response) and to do so without adding to the computational burden of existing fault models. The proposed strategy expands on existing load-flow modeling to account for multiple IBRs on a grid; the fault analysis method is able to correctly predict the output current on IBRs given different fault conditions; however, it only does so for a specific control strategy. Nevertheless, simulating faults on grids with IBRs remains a challenge: expanding on modeling approaches is necessary, and then developing best practices or standards (including new models in fault simulation tools) so that faults can be predicted and managed with confidence. V. R EVIEW OF GRID FAULT CONDITIONS 

A. Literature Review 

Research exploring the impact of IBRs on grid protection systems began to appear in peer-reviewed publications in the mid-2000s. Prior published work focused on the effects of DERs, high-voltage DC (HVDC) systems, and DC-to-AC conversion; technologies that had been deployed in power systems for decades. However, HVDC projects are typically large-scale undertakings that provide only a actual connection points to the BES. It wasn’t until IBRs, a class of DERs, began to grow that prompted additional research into their impact on grid reliability. Figure 2 shows the number of papers published from 2000 to early 2025 that directly discuss grid fault response with respect to IBRs. Note that this collection is not exhaustive, but it covers the majority of publications and is representative of the overall body of work. The rise in publications from 2004 to 2007 focused largely on the impact of DERs [14], [19]–[33]. During 2011-2014 a large number of papers were published discussing the impact and control of wind turbines during grid faults [34]–[47]. Since 2016, papers have addressed several topics related to IBR fault response, including control, modeling techniques for various faults, DER and transmission network impacts, machine-learning-based protection, and more [2], [7]–[9], [11], [12], [18], [48]–[152]. IEEE/IAS 62ND INDUSTRIAL & COMMERCIAL POWER SYSTEMS TECHNICAL CONFERENCE, MAY 2026 6 

> Fig. 2. Annual Papers on IBR Fault Response Published

A few institutions have emerged as leaders in IBR fault research: EPRI [153]–[160], the National Laboratory of the Rockies (NLR) [9], [25], [49], and Schweitzer Engineering Laboratories [161]–[163] have continuously released multiple publications each since 2019. The University of Novisad (Serbia), the University of Waterloo (Canada), and Aalborg University (Denmark) all maintain research teams that have published papers on IBR fault response, primarily within the past five-to-six years. The majority of papers on IBR fault response focus on specific aspects of IBR fault response or specific failure modes. Below is a summary of various fault modes that have been discussed and their implications for grid code, modeling practices, and protection schemes. 

B. IBR Fault Review 

SGs are designed so that, during a short-circuit, their current rises to 5 p.u. or more. Protection systems use this overcurrent as a reliable fault indicator. Because IBRs must satisfy current-limiting requirements, an IBR may only contribute approx. 2 p.u. of current during a fault. Such limited current can prevent protection systems from detecting the fault, causing them to fail to operate promptly and allowing additional grid disturbances to develop. This phenomenon is minor when only one IBR (or a small number) is connected to a transmission or distribution network, but its impact grows as the share of IBRs increases. Moreover, the fault response of an SG is essentially independent of the bus voltage to which it is connected. This is not the case for GFLIs, whose control algorithms use the bus voltage as an input. Consequently, this represent another key difference between SGs and IBRs that can cause misoperation of protection systems unless it is accounted for [14]. The steady-state fault current of an inverter is limited to the saturation current of its power electronics. However, its sub-transient current can rise to approx. 5 times the inverter’s rated current [48]. Section III noted that grid codes provide guidance only for the transient response of IBRs, not for their sub-transient behavior. For a single IBR, the sub-transient fault response is generally negligible because it last only a few milliseconds and contributes only a small fraction of the total grid current and voltage variation. As the share of IBRs increases, the collective sub-transient response of many units can become significant. These overcurrent spikes may exceed the design limits of existing protection systems, causing some relays to operate prematurely, which tripping can result in the loss of additional grid sections and damage to grid components. For example, the 2016 Blue Cut Canyon fire in California damaged the transmission network and produced a series of faults [4]. Each registered fault was cleared rapidly, within four cycles (approx. 70 ms), nevertheless, multiple solar PV inverters entered momentary cessasation. Once in momentary cessation, it took several seconds for each inverter to recognize that the grid conditions were stable before reconnecting. The abrupt disconnection of PV generators caused a grid-wide voltage dip, which in turn cascaded to other PV installations; during that interval, the remaining of the transmission network (at one point the grid lost nearly 1,200 MW of generation) was forced to respond by increasing generation from other sources or by shedding load. In addition, the PV generators used a variety of inverter models, some of which entered momentary cessation mode when distinct faults were detected (e.g., voltage and frequency deviation or frequency instability). IEEE Std 2800 was pub-lished six years later, in 2022, which requires an IBR to detect a fault that lies outside both the COR and the Continuing Operation Region (COVR) before it may enter momentary cessation. Once outside the COR, the inverter must remain there for a prescribed amount of time, which varies with the magnitude of the voltage of frequency. If fully implemented, this standard should prevent the recurrence of this cascading failure; nevertheless, the 2016 event demonstrates that the elec-trical grid remains vulnerable to faults caused by insufficient understanding of IBR fault behavior. Grid faults may result in an instantaneous phase-angle shift when the voltage suddenly jumps by several degrees [49]. SGs have built-in damping that helps them absorb such shifts; IBRs lack this capability. The abrupt shift can disrupt an inverter’s PLL, causing frequency or voltage dips/spikes, or even a IEEE/IAS 62ND INDUSTRIAL & COMMERCIAL POWER SYSTEMS TECHNICAL CONFERENCE, MAY 2026 7

complete current collapse and inverter disconnect if the shift is large enough. In such an event, the PLL continues to track the grid waveform, but the supplied current may become unstable (or be lost entirely) for several seconds, providing enough time for other grid-connected devices to respond. This can result in unexpected dynamics or cascading failures, similar to those observed during the 2016 Blue Cut Canyon Fire blackout. Grid code differences may result in misoperation of distance relays during faults. Khan et al. (2022) [52] present several simulated scenarios in which FTC cannot correctly identify a fault when IBRs are added to a transmission network. Without grid code requirements governing IBR fault response, FTC relies on fault-response data derived from SGs; consequently, faults may be misidentified due to the current limiting of IBRs. Even when grid codes guide IBR fault response, FTC may still misidentify faults for a variety of reasons. If a grid code is newly introduced and not strictly enforced, FTC may not classify faults correctly, leaving grid operators uncertain about the reliability of their protection devices. Simulated examples of misidentified fault responses with one or two IBRs added to transmission networks are shown in Khan et al. (2022) [52]; this paper also presents examples of an IBR injecting negative sequence current during an unbalanced fault, in accordance with current German grid code requirements. In some instances, the negative sequence current injection is sufficient for FTC to identify the fault correctly, however, in other instances it is unable to overcome the inverter’s current limiting behavior [51]. GFMIs introduce a wide range of new issues and potential solutions for grid fault protection. The primary concern is determining the exact moment an inverter will either discon-nect from the grid and switch to islanded mode, or reconnect from islanded mode. If a GFMI switches to islanded mode unexpectedly, it may appear to a utility operator as if that section of the grid has gone dark. The resulting transient can trigger protection systems to engage, potentially creating a fault that would not otherwise exist. Should several GFMIs disconnect simultaneously due to a perceived fault in the grid, especially when the grid relies on those IBRs to maintain stability, a cascading failure could follow. Consequently, in the event of a blackout caused by an extreme event (such as a hurricane), operating microgrids could pose a risk to repair crews: if an islanded GFMI reconnects to the grid while crews are still working, it could energize sections of the grid unexpectedly [50]. When handled correctly, GFMIs (and the ability to form microgrids) can provide benefits to grid resiliency, provided that control dynamics are understood and well-written standards are in place. VI. C ONCLUSION 

Inverter-based resources have a wide range of designs and control strategies. Consequently, the way IBRs respond during faults (or impact the broader electrical grid with their fault response) is not well understood and continue to evolving as newer technologies and control methods are developed. Some locations have started establishing requirements and standards for IBRs fault response; however, these standards are not yet comprehensive, and it is uncertain how well IBR owners will be able to meet them or how rigorously they will be en-forced. Modeling tools vary in their ability to represent IBRs, particularly regarding the response characteristics required by emerging standards; this makes it challenging to verify the expected performance of both IBRs and the associated fault protection schemes. The key gaps in understanding and development that must be addressed to ensure a reliable grid are outlined next. Among the various impacts on grid protection, the most pressing is grid modeling, specifically the need for operators to have accurate information available when conducting fault analysis studies. The 2016 Blue Cut Canyon fire provides a concrete example of what can happen when expected IBR behavior differ from reality. IEEE standards provide common practice and specific operating requirements for IBRs, which helps improve the fidelity of their models. More detailed guid-ance on IBR fault-ride-through behavior, including positive and negative sequence current injection profiles, would allow operators to model IBRs more accurately and to assess their impacts across interconnected grids. Electric grid operation today still relies primarily on syn-chronous generators to maintain balance and respond to faults, with only limited support from IBRs. Many issues introduced by IBRs are easily overlooked because each unit’s individual impact is minor. While it is difficult to quantify how a given IBR penetration level will affect grid reliability, it is likely that faults resulting in loss of power will increase as IBR penetration grows. Consequently, protection devices and IBR control systems will need to be updated to accommodate higher penetration levels. Recent research has produced protection and control schemes capable of handling both the high-current sub-transient and the current-limited transient responses of IBRs during faults. Other studies have addressed rapid grid-phase changes, improved distance relay algorithms to identify faults on grids with high IBR penetration, and examined other fault types described above. It will be important for these improvements to be implemented as early as possible to avoid costly disruptions. The use of IBRs is increasingly necessary, given rising electricity demand and the declining cost of renewable en-ergy technologies. Research must continue into how best to implement and integrate IBRs. However, given the rapid rate of growth, it will be critical to understand and proactively manage their impact on the electric grid. IEEE/IAS 62ND INDUSTRIAL & COMMERCIAL POWER SYSTEMS TECHNICAL CONFERENCE, MAY 2026 8

REFERENCES [1] P. Kundur. Power System Stability and Control, 1994. [2] P. Denholm, T. Mai, R. Kenyon, B. Kroposki, and M. O’Malley. Inertia and the Power Grid: A Guide Without the Spin. National Renewable Energy Laboratory , May 2020. [3] P. Unruh, M. Nuschke, P. Strauss, and F. Welck. Overview on Grid-Forming Inverter Control Methods. Energies , 2020. [4] North American Reliability Corporation. Inverter-Based Resource Disturbance Analysis: Key Findings and Recommendations, Feb 2018. [5] Expert Panel on the Grid Incident on 28 April 2025. Grid Incident in Spain and Portugal on 28 April 2025, Oct 2025. [6] J. Glover, M. Sarma, and T. Overbye. Power System Analysis and Design, 2010. [7] M. M. Mobashsher, A. A. Abdoos, S. M. Hosseini, S. M. Hashemi, and M. Sanaye-Pasand. A New Fault Type Classification Method in the Presence of Inverter-Based Resources. International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems , 147, 2023. [8] A. Haddadi, E. Farantatos, I. Kocar, and U. Karaagac. Impact of Inverter Based Resources on System Protection. Energies , 2021. [9] Y. Lin, J. H. Eto, B. B. Johnson, J. D. Flicker, R. H. Lasseter, H. N. Villegas Pico, G.-S. Seo, B. J. Pierre, A. Ellis, J. Miller, and G. Yuan. Pathways to the Next-Generation Power System With Inverter-Based Resources: Challenges and Recommendations. IEEE Electrification Magazine , 10, Mar 2022. [10] D. B. Rathnayake, M. Akrami, C. Phurailatpam, S. P. Me, S. Hadavi, G. Jayasinghe, Z. Zabihi, and B. Bahrani. Grid Forming Inverter Modeling, Control, and Applications. The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers IEEE Access , 2021. [11] R. Walton. Island-Wide Outage on Kaua’i: Clouds Block Solar Recovery After Generator’s Cable Failure, Jul 2019. [12] B. Weise. Impact of K-factor and Active Current Reduction Dur-ing Fault-Ride-Through of Generating Units Connected via Voltage-Sourced Converters on Power System Stability. IET Renewable Power Generation , Jan 2015. [13] North American Electrical Reliability Corporation. Reliability Stan-dards Under Development. [14] C. A. Plet, M. Graovac, T. C. Green, and R. Iravani. Fault Response of Grid-Connected Inverter Dominated Networks. In Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE PES General Meeting , Jul 2010. [15] Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Standards Association. IEEE Standard for Interconnection and Interoperability of Distributed Energy Resources with Associated Electric Power Systems Interfaces, Apr 2018. [16] 109th Congress of the United States of America. Energy Policy Act of 2005, Aug 2005. [17] Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Standards Association. IEEE Standard for Interconnection and Interoperability of Inverter-Based Resources Interconnecting with Associated Transmission Elec-tric Power Systems, Apr 2022. [18] Y. Lin, J. H. Eto, B. B. Johnson, J. D. Flicker, R. H. Lasseter, H. N. Villegas Pico, G. Seo, B. J. Pierre, and A. Ellis. Research Roadmap on Grid-Forming Inverters. National Renewable Energy Laboratory ,NREL/TP-5D00-73476, Nov 2020. [19] A. V. Timbus, P. Rodriguez, R. Teodorescu, M. Liserre, and F. Blaabjerg. Control Strategies for Distributed Power Generation Sys-tems Operating on Faulty Grid. In Proceedings of the 2006 IEEE International Symposium on Industrial Electronics , 2006. [20] M. Brucoli, T. C. Green, and J. D. F. McDonald. Modelling and Analysis of Fault Behaviour of Inverter Microgrids to Aid Future Fault Detection. In Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE International Conference on System of Systems Engineering , 2007. [21] K. Kauhaniemi and L. Kumpulainen. Impact of Distributed Generation on the Protection of Distribution Networks. In Proceedings of the 8th IEEE International Conference on Developments in Power System Protection , 2004. [22] M. E. Baran and I. El-Markaby. Fault Analysis on Distribution Feeders with Distributed Generators. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , 20, Nov 2005. [23] N. Nimpitiwan, G. T. Heydt, R. Ayyanar, and S. Suryanarayanan. Fault Current Contribution From Synchronous Machine and Inverter Based Distributed Generators. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 22, Jan 2007. [24] D. Turcotte and F. Katiraei. Fault Contribution of Grid-Connected Inverters. In Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE Electrical Power and Energy Conference , 2009. [25] J. Keller and B. Kroposki. Understanding Fault Characteristics of Inverter-Based Distributed Energy Resources. National Renewable Energy Laboratory Technical Report , Jan 2010. [26] R. M. Tumilty, M. Brucoli, G. M. Burt, and T. C. Green. Approaches to Network Protection for Inverter Dominated Electrical Distribution Systems. In Proceedings of the 3rd IET International Conference on Power Electronics , 2006. [27] H. Hooshyar and M. E. Baran. Fault Analysis on Distribution Feeders With High Penetration of PV Systems. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , 28(3):2890–2896, Aug 2013. [28] M. E. Baran and I. El-Markaby. Fault Analysis on Distribution Feeders with Distributed Generators. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , 20, Nov 2005. [29] G. Tang and R. Iravani. Application of a Fault Current Limiter to Minimize Distributed Generation Impact on Coordinated Relay Protection. In Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on Power Systems Transients , Jan 2005. [30] R. J. Bravo, R. Salas, R. Yinger, and S. Robles. Solar Photovoltaic Inverters Transient Over-Voltages. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting , 2013. [31] D. V. Tu and S. Chaitusaney. Impacts of Inverter-Based Distributed Generation Control Modes on Short-circuit Currents in Distribution Systems. In Proceedings of the 7th IEEE Conference on Industrial Electronics and Applications , 2012. [32] T. S. Sidhu and D. Bejmert. Short-Circuit Current Contribution from Large Scale PV Power Plant in the Context of Distribution Power System Protection Performance. In Proceedings of the 2011 IET Conference on Renewable Power Generation , 2011. [33] F. Katiraei, J. Holbach, T. Chang, W. Johnson, D. Wills, B. Young, L. Marti, A. Yan, P. Baroutis, G. Thompson, and J. Rajda. Investigation of Solar PV Inverters Current Contributions during Faults on Distribution and Transmission Systems Interruption Capacity. In Proceedings of the 2012 Western Protective Relay Conference , Oct 2012. [34] s. V. Pico and S. Aliprantis. Voltage Ride-Through Capability Verifica-tion of Wind Turbines with Fully-Rated Converters using Reachability Analysis. In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting , 2015. [35] R. A. Walling, E. Gursoy, and B. English. Current Contributions from Type 3 and Type 4 Wind Turbine Generators During Faults. In 

Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE Power and Energy Society Transmission and Distribution Conference and Exposition , 2012. [36] T. Kauffmann, U. Karaagac, I. Kocar, H. Gras, J. Mahseredjian, B. Cetindag, and E. Farantatos. Phasor Domain Modeling of Type III Wind Turbine Generator for Protection Studies. IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting , 2015. [37] IEEE Power and Energy Society Joint Working Group. Fault Current Contributions from Wind Plants. In Proceedings of the 68th Annual Conference for Protective Relay Engineers , 2015. [38] M. Fischer and A. Mendonca. Representation of Variable Speed Full Conversion Wind Energy Converters for Steady State Short-Circuit Calculations. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE PES Transmission and Distribution Conference and Exposition , 2017. [39] E. Farantatos, U. Karaagac, H. Saad, and J. Mahseredjian. Short-Circuit Current Contribution of Converter Interfaced Wind Turbines and the Impact on System Protection. In Proceedings of the IREP Symposium Bulk Power System Dynamics and Control , 2013. [40] I. Erlich, T. Neumann, F. Shewarega, P. Schegner, and J. Meyer. Wind Turbine Negative Sequence Current Control and its Effect on Power System Protection. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting , 2013. [41] J. C. Boemer, M. Gibescu, M. A. M. M. vd Meijden, B. G. Rawn, and W. L. Kling. Network Fault Response of Wind Power Plants in Distribution Systems During Reverse Power Flows. In Proceedings of the 12th International Workshop on Large-Scale Integration of Wind Power into Power Systems as well as on Transmission Networks for Offshore Wind Power Plants , Oct 2013. [42] I. Erlich, F. Shewarega, S. Engelhardt, J. Kretschmann, J. Fortmann, and F. Koch. Effect of Wind Turbine Output Current During Faults on Grid Voltage and the Transient Stability of Wind Parks. In Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting , 2009. [43] O. Goksu, R. Teodorescu, C. L. Bak, F. Iov, and P. C. Kjar. Instability of Wind Turbine Converters During Current Injection to Low Voltage Grid Faults and PLL Frequency Based Stability Solution. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , 29, Jul 2014. [44] J. Morren and S. W. H. de Haan. Short-Circuit Current of Wind Turbines With Doubly Fed Induction Generator. IEEE Transactions on Energy Conversion , 22, Mar 2007. IEEE/IAS 62ND INDUSTRIAL & COMMERCIAL POWER SYSTEMS TECHNICAL CONFERENCE, MAY 2026 9

[45] T. Kauffmann, U. Karaagac, I. Kocar, S. Jensen, E. Farantatos, A. Haddadi, and J. Mahseredjian. Short-Circuit Model for Type-IV Wind Turbine Generators With Decoupled Sequence Control. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 34, Oct 2019. [46] A. Hooshyar, M. A. Azzouz, and E. F. El-Saadany. Distance Protection of Lines Connected to Induction Generator-Based Wind Farms During Balanced Faults. IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy , 5, Oct 2014. [47] L. He, C.-C. Liu, A. Pitto, and D. Cirio. Distance Protection of AC Grid With HVDC-Connected Offshore Wind Generators. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 29, Apr 2014. [48] B Popadic, B Dumnic, and L Strezoski. Modeling of Initial Fault Response of Inverter-Based Distributed Energy Resources for Future Power System Planning. International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems , May 2020. [49] O. Aworo and B Mather. Experimental Determination of PV Inverter Response to Grid Phase Shift Events. National Renewable Energy Laboratory , Aug. 2018. [50] B. O. Winter, N. Schulz, and B. Engel. Effects of the Use of Grid-Forming Converters on the Islanding Detection of Existing Low-Voltage Systems. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Sustain-able Energy Supply and Energy Storage Systems , 2024. [51] A. Haddadi, M. Zhao, I. Kocar, U. Karaagac, K. W. Chan, and E. Faran-tatos. Impact of Inverter Based Resource Negative Sequence Current Injection on Transmission System Protection. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 36(1), Feb 2021. [52] Y. U. Khan, O. D. Naidu, and A. K. Pradhan. A Fault Classification Method For Power Transmission Line Connected to Converter Inter-faced Renewable Power Plants. In Proceedings of the 22nd National Power Systems Conference , 2022. [53] N. Cho, S. Yun, and J. Jung. Shunt Fault Analysis Methodology for Power Distribution Networks with Inverter-Based Distributed Energy Resources of the Korea Electric Power Corporation. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews , 133, 2020. [54] P. K. Mansani, M. Zadeh, and I. Voloh. Impact of IBR Negative Se-quence Current Characteristic on Distance Protection. In Proceedings of the 2021 Georgia Institute of Technology Protective Relaying Virtual Conference , Apr 2021. [55] A. Camacho, M. Castilla, J. Miret, L. G. de Vicu˜ na, and R. Guzman. Positive and Negative Sequence Control Strategies to Maximize the Voltage Support in Resistive–Inductive Grids During Grid Faults. IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics , 33(6):5362–5373, Jun 2018. [56] A. Haddadi, M. Zhao, I. Kocar, U. Karaagac, K. W. Chan, and E. Farantatos. Impact of Inverter-Based Resources on Negative Sequence Quantities-Based Protection Elements. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 36, Feb 2021. [57] M. R. D. Zadeh, P. K. Mansani, and D. Ting. Impact of Inverter-Based Resources on Impedance-Based Protection Functions. In Proceedings of the 2010 International Conference on Developments in Power System Protection , 2020. [58] Quispe, J.C., and Orduna, E. Transmission Line Protection Challenges Influenced by Inverter-Based Resources: A Review. Protection and Control of Modern Power Systems , 2022. [59] R. Chowdhury, M. Alla, N. Fischer, and S. Samineni. Restricted Earth Fault Protection in Low-Impedance Grounded Systems With Inverter-Based Resources. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 38, Feb 2023. [60] S. Paladhi and A. K. Pradhan. Adaptive Fault Type Classification for Transmission Network Connecting Converter-Interfaced Renewable Plants. IEEE Systems Journal , 15, 2021. [61] S. Paladhi, Q. Hong, and C. Booth. Adaptive Faulted Phase Selection for Lines Connecting Converter-Based Sources. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Renewable Power Generation , 2022. [62] V. K. Gaur, S. Chakrabarti, and A. Sharma. Improving faulty phase selection in PV integrated system with compensation angle approach. 

Electric Power Systems Research , 226, 2024. [63] H. Zhang, W. Xiang, Q. Hong, and J. Wen. Active Phase Control to Enhance Distance Relay in Converter-Interfaced Renewable Energy Systems. International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems , 143, 2022. [64] W. Liu, X. Guo, M. Savaghebi, and J. M. Guerrero. Fault Ride Though Control of Photovoltaic Grid-connected Inverter with Current-limited Capability under Offshore Unbalanced Voltage Conditions. In 

Proceedings of the 2016 Offshore Energy and Storage Symposium , Jul 2016. [65] T. Qoria, H. Wu, X. Wang, and I. Colak. Variable Virtual Impedance-Based Overcurrent Protection for Grid-Forming Inverters: Small-Signal, Large-Signal Analysis and Improvement. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , 14, Sep 2023. [66] R. Chowdhury and N. Fischer. Transmission Line Protection for Systems With Inverter-Based Resources – Part I: Problems. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 36, Aug 2021. [67] R. Chowdhury and N. Fischer. Transmission Line Protection for Systems With Inverter-Based Resources – Part II: Solutions. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 36, Aug 2021. [68] S. Kariyawasam, J. Wijekoon, and A. Rajapakse. Assessment of the Performance of Phasor-Based and Transients-Based Faulted Phase Identification Techniques in the Presence of Inverter Interfaced Re-sources. Energies , 2023. [69] Z. Yang, W. Liao, Q. Zhang, C. L. Bak, and Z. Chen. Fault Co-ordination Control for Converter-Interfaced Sources Compatible With Distance Protection During Asymmetrical Faults. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics , 70, July 2023. [70] C. Chao, X. Zheng, Y. Weng, Y. Liu, P. Gao, and N. Tai. Adaptive Distance Protection Based on the Analytical Model of Additional Impedance for Inverter-Interfaced Renewable Power Plants During Asymmetrical Faults. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 37, Oct 2022. [71] Z. Yang, W. Liao, H. Wang, C. L. Bak, and Z. Chen. Improved Euclidean Distance Based Pilot Protection for Lines With Renewable Energy Sources. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics , 18, Dec 2022. [72] A. Azizi, A. Banaiemoqadam, A. Hooshyar, and M. Patel. A Blind Spot in the LVRT Current Requirements of Modern Grid Codes for Inverter-Based Resources. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 38, Feb 2023. [73] A. Ghorbani and H. Mehrjerdi. Distance Protection with Fault Resis-tance Compensation for Lines Connected to PV Plant. International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems , 148, 2023. [74] M. J. B. B. Davi, M. Oleskovicz, and F. V. Lopes. Study on IEEE 2800-2022 Standard Benefits for Transmission Line Protection in the Presence of Inverter-Based Resources. Electric Power Systems Research , 220, 2023. [75] M. A. Nasr and A. Hooshyar. Controlling Grid-Forming Inverters to Meet the Negative-Sequence Current Requirements of the IEEE Standard 2800-2022. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 38, Aug 2023. [76] Z. Yang, Q. Zhang, W. Liao, C. L. Bak, and Z. Chen. Harmonic Injection Based Distance Protection for Line With Converter-Interfaced Sources. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics , 70, Feb 2023. [77] A. Banaiemoqadam, A. Hooshyar, and M. A. Azzouz. A Control-Based Solution for Distance Protection of Lines Connected to Converter-Interfaced Sources During Asymmetrical Faults. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 35, Jun 2020. [78] G. Song, P. Chang, J. Hou, W. Li, and C. Zhang. A Time-Domain Distance Protection Method Applicable to Inverter-Interfaced Systems. 

Electric Power Systems Research , 225, 2023. [79] P. Jafarian and F. Aminifar. A Comparison of the Impact of Current Priority Modes of Inverter-Based Resources on the Performance of Grid Protective Relays. In Proceedings of the 2024 International Conference on Protection and Automation in Power Systems , 2024. [80] S. Cao, Q. Hong, D. Liu, and C. Booth. Review and Evaluation of Control-Based Protection Solutions for Converter-Dominated Power Systems. IEEE Belgrade PowerTech , 2023. [81] R. Luo, H. Gao, F. Peng, and Y. Guo. An Adaptive Low-Voltage Ride-Through Method for Virtual Synchronous Generators During Asymmetrical Grid Faults. IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy ,15, Jul 2024. [82] A. Haddadi, I. Kocar, J. Mahseredjian, U. Karaagac, and E. Farantatos. Negative Sequence Quantities-Based Protection Under Inverter-Based Resources: Challenges and Impact of the German Grid Code. Electric Power Systems Research , 188, 2020. [83] J. Jia, G. Yang, A. H. Nielsen, and P. Ronne-Hansen. Impact of VSC Control Strategies and Incorporation of Synchronous Condensers on Distance Protection Under Unbalanced Faults. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics , 66, Feb 2019. [84] A. Haddadi, I. Kocar, J. Mahseredjian, U. Karaagac, and E. Farantatos. Performance of Phase Comparison Line Protection Under Inverter-Based Resources and Impact of the German Grid Code. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting , 2020. [85] A. Hooshyar, M. A. Azzouz, and E. F. El-Saadany. Distance Protection of Lines Emanating From Full-Scale Converter-Interfaced Renewable Energy Power Plants—Part I: Problem Statement. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 30, Aug 2015. IEEE/IAS 62ND INDUSTRIAL & COMMERCIAL POWER SYSTEMS TECHNICAL CONFERENCE, MAY 2026 10 

[86] R. Kabiri, D. G. Holmes, and B. P. McGrath. Control of Active and Reactive Power Ripple to Mitigate Unbalanced Grid Voltages. IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications , 52, Apr 2016. [87] J. Gui, H. Lei, and B. K. Johnson. A Superimposed Quantity-Based Protection Method for Power Systems with Inverter-Based Resources. 

Electric Power Systems Research , 232, Nov 2024. [88] A. Banaiemoqadam, A. Azizi, A. Hooshyar, M. Kanabar, and E. F. El-Saadany. Impact of Inverter-Based Resources on Different Imple-mentation Methods for Distance Relays – Part I: Phase Comparators. 

IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 38, Dec 2023. [89] A. Banaiemoqadam, A. Azizi, A. Hooshyar, M. Kanabar, and E. F. El-Saadany. Impact of Inverter-Based Resources on Different Implementation Methods for Distance Relays – Part II: Reactance Method. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 38, Dec 2023. [90] A. Banaiemoqadam, S. M. Hashemi, and A. Hooshyar. Loss-of-Voltage Detection for Relays Protecting Systems With Inverter-Based Resources. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 37, Feb 2022. [91] K. Xu, Z. Zhang, Z. Lai, and X. Yin. Fault Phase Selection Method Applied to Tie Line of Renewable Energy Power Stations. IET Generation, Transmission, and Distribution , 14, May 2020. [92] Q. Alsafasfeh, O. A. Saraereh, I. Khan, and S. Kim. LS-Solar-PV System Impact on Line Protection. Electronics , 2019. [93] E. Martinez Carrasco, M. P. Comech Moreno, M. T. Villen Martinez, and S. Borroy Vicente. Improved Faulted Phase Selection Algorithm for Distance Protection under High Penetration of Renewable Energies. 

Energies , 2020. [94] M. A. Azzouz, A. Hooshyar, and E. F. El-Saadany. Resilience Enhancement of Microgrids With Inverter-Interfaced DGs by Enabling Faulty Phase Selection. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , 9, Nov 2018. [95] A. A. Aboelnaga, M. A. Azzouz, A. S. A. Awad, and H. F. Sindi. Dual Current Control of Inverter-Based Resources for Enhanced Resilience and Complying Grid Codes. In Proceedings of the 2023 IEEE Power and Energy Society Conference on Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Middle East , 2023. [96] X. Zhao, J. M. Guerrero, M. Savaghebi, J. C. Vasquez, X. Wu, and K. Sun. Low-Voltage Ride-Through Operation of Power Converters in Grid-Interactive Microgrids by Using Negative-Sequence Droop Control. IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics , 32, Apr 2017. [97] M. A. Azzouz and A. Hooshyar. Dual Current Control of Inverter-Interfaced Renewable Energy Sources for Precise Phase Selection. 

IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , 10, Sep 2019. [98] A. A. Aboelnaga and M. A. Azzouz. Dual Stationary Frame Control of Inverter-based Resources for Reliable Phase Selection. In Proceedings of the 19th IEEE International Conference on Industrial Informatics ,2021. [99] A. Banaiemoqadam, A. Hooshyar, and M. A. Azzouz. A Compre-hensive Dual Current Control Scheme for Inverter-Based Resources to Enable Correct Operation of Protective Relays. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 36, Oct 2021. [100] M. A. Azzouz, H. H. Zeineldin, and E. F. El-Saadany. Selective Phase Tripping for Microgrids Powered by Synchronverter-Interfaced Renewable Energy Sources. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery ,36, Dec 2021. [101] Z. Shuai, W. Huang, C. Shen, J. Ge, and Z. J. Shen. Characteristics and Restraining Method of Fast Transient Inrush Fault Currents in Synchronverters. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics , 64, Sep 2017. [102] L. He, Z. Shuai, X. Zhang, X. Liu, Z. Li, and Z. J. Shen. Transient Characteristics of Synchronverters Subjected to Asymmetric Faults. 

IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 34, Jun 2019. [103] M. A. Jarrahi, H. Samet, and T. Ghanbari. Protection Framework for Microgrids with Inverter-Based DGs: A Superimposed Component and Waveform Similarity-Based Fault Detection and Classification Scheme. 

The Institution of Engineering and Technology , 16, Mar 2022. [104] J. Ge, Z. Shuai, C. Tu, A. Luo, and Z. J. Shen. Flexible Control Strategy for Enhancing Power Injection Capability of Three-Phase Four-Wire Inverter During Asymmetrical Grid Faults. IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics , 36, Aug 2021. [105] A. Mora, R. Cardenas, M. Urrutia, M. Espinoza, and M. Diaz. A Vector Control Strategy to Eliminate Active Power Oscillations in Four-Leg Grid-Connected Converters Under Unbalanced Voltages. IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected Topics in Power Electronics , 8, Jun 2020. [106] Z. Shuai, M. Xiao, J. Ge, and Z. J. Shen. Overcurrent and its Restrain-ing Method of PQ-Controlled Three-Phase Four-Wire Converter Under Asymmetrical Grid Fault. IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected Topics in Power Electronics , 7, Sep 2019. [107] W. Medhat and M. A. Azzouz. Triple Current Control of Four-Wire Inverter-Interfaced DGs for Correct Fault Type Identification. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , 13, Sep 2022. [108] V. Boscaino, V. Ditta, G. Marsala, N. Panzavecchia, G. Tine, V. Cosentino, A. Cataliotti, and D. Di Cara. Grid-Connected Photovoltaic Inverters: Grid Codes, Topologies and Control Techniques. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews , 189, 2024. [109] Z. Yang, W. Liao, C. L. Bak, and Z. Chen. Control-Based Faulty Phase Detection Methods for Lines With Converter-Interfaced Sources. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics , 71, July 2024. [110] K. Jia, Z. Yang, Y. Fang, T. Bi, and M. Sumner. Influence of Inverter-Interfaced Renewable Energy Generators on Directional Relay and an Improved Scheme. IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics , 34, Dec 2019. [111] A. K. Barnes and A. Mate. Implementing Admittance Relaying for Microgrid Protection. In Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE/IAS 57th Industrial and Commercial Power Systems Technical Conference , pages 1–9, Apr 2021. [112] A. Jodaei, Z. Moravej, and M. Pazoki. Effective Protection Scheme for Transmission Lines Connected to Large Scale Photovoltaic Power Plants. Electric Power Systems Research , 228, 2024. [113] Moises J. B. B. Davi, Mario Oleskovicz, and Felipe V. Lopes. Ex-ploring the Potential of a Machine Learning-Based Methodology for Fault Classification in Inverter-Based Resource Interconnection Lines. 

Electric Power Systems Research , 223, 2023. [114] A. Jodaei, Z. Moravej, and M. Pazoki. Fault Detection and Classi-fication in Parallel and semi-parallel Transmission Lines Connected to Large-Scale Photovoltaic Power Plants Using Artificial Neural Networks and Support Vector Machines. In Proceedings of the 2024 International Conference on Protection and Automation in Power Systems , 2024. [115] H. Panahi, M. Sanaye-Pasand, and M. Davarpanah. Three-Terminal Lines Fault Location Using Two Main Terminals Data in the Presence of Renewable Energy Sources. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , 14, May 2023. [116] T. R. Mabote, J. E. Tabarez, A. K. Barnes, A. Mate, R. W. Bent, and E. Cotilla-Sanchez. Developing Optimization-Based Inverter Models for Short Circuit Studies. In Proceedings of the 2023 IEEE International Conference on Environment and Electrical Engineering and 2023 IEEE Industrial and Commercial Power Systems Europe , pages 1–6, Jun 2023. [117] B. Kasztenny. Distance Elements for Line Protection Applications Near Unconventional Sources. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Minnesota Power Systems Conference , Nov 2022. [118] F. V. Lopes, M. J. B. B. Davi, M. Oleskovicz, A. Hooshyar, X. Dong, and A. A. A. Neto. Maturity Analysis of Protection Solutions for Power Systems Near Inverter-Based Resources. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 39, Oct 2024. [119] A. Azizi and A. Hooshyar. Fault Current Limiting and Grid Code Compliance for Grid-Forming Inverters – Part II: Solution. IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy , 15, Oct 2024. [120] J. Alvidrez, S. Ranade, S. Brahma, S. Bukowski, C. Silva-Monroy, and A. Ellis. An Analytical Model of a Single Phase DQ-Controlled Inverter for Power System Short Circuit Calculations. In Proceedings of the 2016 North American Power Symposium , 2016. [121] K. Jones, P. Pourbeik, G. Kobet, and A. Berner. Impact of Inverter Based Generation on Bulk Power System Dynamics and Short-Circuit Performance. IEEE PES Technical Report , July 2018. [122] T. Sadamoto, A. Chakrabortty, T. Ishizaki, and J.-I. Imura. Dynamic Modeling, Stability, and Control of Power Systems With Distributed Energy Resources: Handling Faults Using Two Control Methods in Tandem. IEEE Control Systems Magazine , 39, Apr 2019. [123] A. Girgis and S. Brahma. Effect of Distributed Generation on Protective Device Coordination in Distribution System. In Proceedings of the 2001 Large Engineering Systems Conference on Power Engineering ,2001. [124] A. Mojallal and S. Lotfifard. Enhancement of Grid Connected PV Arrays Fault Ride Through and Post Fault Recovery Performance. 

IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , 10, Jan 2019. [125] M. Ndreko, M. Popov, and M. A. M. M. van der Meijden. Study on FRT Compliance of VSC-HVDC Connected Offshore Wind Plants During AC Faults Including Requirements for the Negative Sequence Current Control. International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems , 85, 2017. [126] W.-M. Guo, L.-H. Mu, and X. Zhang. Fault Models of Inverter-Interfaced Distributed Generators Within a Low-Voltage Microgrid. 

IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 32, Feb 2017. IEEE/IAS 62ND INDUSTRIAL & COMMERCIAL POWER SYSTEMS TECHNICAL CONFERENCE, MAY 2026 11 

[127] J. Jia, G. Yang, and A. H. Nielsen. A Review on Grid-Connected Converter Control for Short-Circuit Power Provision Under Grid Un-balanced Faults. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 32, Apr 2018. [128] F. Wang, J. L. Duarte, and M. A. M. Hendrix. Active Power Control Strategies for Inverter-Based Distributed Power Generation Adapted to Grid-Fault Ride-Through Requirements. In Proceedings of the 13th European Conference on Power Electronics and Applications , 2019. [129] I. Todorovic, S. Grabic, and Z. Ivanovic. Grid-Connected Converter Active and Reactive Power Production Maximization with Respect to Current Limitations During Grid Faults. International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems , 101, 2018. [130] L. V. Strezoski, B. Dumnic, B. Popadic, M. Prica, and K. A. Loparo. Novel Fault Models for Electronically Coupled Distributed Energy Resources and Their Laboratory Validation. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , 35, Mar 2020. [131] L. Strezoski, M. Prica, and K. A. Loparo. Generalized Delta-Circuit Concept for Integration of Distributed Generators in Online Short-Circuit Calculations. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , 32, Jul 2017. [132] G. Kou, L. Chen, P. VanSant, F. Velez-Cedeno, and Y. Liu. Fault Characteristics of Distributed Solar Generation. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 35, Apr 2020. [133] Working Group C32. Protection Challenges and Practices for Inter-connecting Inverter Based Resources to Utility Transmission Systems. 

Power System Relaying and Control Committee , 2017. [134] G. Kou, J. Jordan, B. Cockerham, R. Patterson, and P. VanSant. Negative-Sequence Current Injection of Transmission Solar Farms. 

IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 35, Dec 2020. [135] M. Nagpal and C. Henville. Impact of Power-Electronic Sources on Transmission Line Ground Fault Protection. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 33, Feb 2018. [136] A. Haddadi, I. Kocar, U. Karaagac, H. Gras, and E. Farantatos. Impact of Wind Generation on Power Swing Protection. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 34, Jun 2019. [137] N. M. Sapari, H. Mokhlis, J. A. Laghari, A. H. A. Bakar, and M. R. M. Dahalan. Application of Load Shedding Schemes for Distribution Network Connected with Distributed Generation. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews , 82, 2018. [138] P. Rodriguez, R. Teodorescu, I. Candela, A. V. Timbus, M. Liserre, and F. Blaabjerg. New Positive-Sequence Voltage Detector for Grid Synchronization of Power Converters Under Faulty Grid Conditions. In Proceedings of the 37th IEEE Power Electronics Specialists Con-ference , 2006. [139] D. Van Tu, S. Chaitusaney, and A. Yokoyama. Maximum Allowable Distributed Generation Considering Fault Ride Through Requirement and Reach Reduction of Utility Relay. In Proceedings of the 10th International Power and Energy Conference , 2012. [140] F. Peng, H. Gao, Y. Fang, and H. Song. A Calculation Method of Electrical Quantities During Faults for Distribution Network with Grid-Forming Inverter-Based Resources. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Developments in Power System Protection ,2025. [141] M. Farshad and M. Pazoki. A Data-Driven Compensation Method for Distance Relays Near Inverter-Based Resources During Phase-to-Phase Faults. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , 16, Nov 2025. [142] K. Opoku and A. Dimitrovski. A Dynamic Phasor-Based Approach to Fault Detection in Power Systems with Inverter-Based Resources. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE Texas Power and Energy Conference , 2025. [143] M. J. B. B. Davi, M. Oleskovicz, and F. V. Lopes. A Novel High-Sensitivity Time-Domain Fault Classifier Applied to Inverter-Based Resource Interconnection Lines. IEEE Access , 13, Mar 2025. [144] F. Mahr. Control and Protection of 100 Percent Inverter-based Power Systems. Springer View , 2025. [145] L. N. Rueda-Can, V. H. Gonzalez-Sanchez, V. Torres, and S. Zavala. Evaluation of the Performance of Impedance-Based Fault Location Methods in the Presence of High Penetration of Inverter-Based Re-sources. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Autumn Meeting on Power, Electronics and Computing , Nov 2025. [146] A. N. Praveen and S. A. Rabbani. Incremental Quantity Based Protection for Transmission Line connecting Inverter Based Resources. In Proceedings of the 2025 Saudi Arabia Smart Grid , Dec 2025. [147] K. Agarwal, P. Gajare, J. Benzaquen, and D. Divan. Inverter Fault Current Multiplier for Grid-Interactive Converters. IEEE Ttranscations on Pover Electronics , 41(4), Oct 2025. [148] J. D. Pinzon, F. Santamaria, and A. Espinel. Machine Learning-Based Voltage Fault Ride-Through Assessment of Inverter-Based Resources Using Phasor Measurement Units. Renewable Energy , 256, Jan 2026. [149] D. Liu, C. K. Tse, J. Yang, and X. Zhang. Revealing Cascading Failure Vulnerability in Evolving Power Grids With Increasing Penetration of Inverter-Based Resources. IEEE Transcations On Circuits and Systems ,72(9), Sep 2025. [150] M. Fresia, M. Minetti, A. Bonfiglio, and R. Procopio. Short Circuit Analysis and Voltage Support Needs in Power Systems with Relevant Share of Inverter-Based Resources. Sustainable Energy, Grids and Networks , 44, Dec 2025. [151] H. Hugo and J. Beukes. The Impact of Disturbances on Grid Connected Inverter-Based Resources. In Proceedings of the 33rd Southern African Universities Power Engineering Conference , 2025. [152] A. Saeed, M. Jensen, A. Zamani, T. I. Raffield, A. Bidram, and M. J. Reno. Utility Experience with Inverter-Based Resource Impacts on Transmission Protection. Sandia National Laboratories Technical Report , Feb 2025. [153] A. Haddadi, E. Farantatos, I. Kocar, and U. Karaagac. Impact of Inverter Based Resources on System Protection. Energies , 2013. [154] A. Haddadi, E. Farantatos, I. Kocar, and U. Karaagac. Impact of Inverter Based Resources on System Protection. Energies , Feb 2021. [155] A. Haddadi, M. Zhao, I. Kocar, U. Karaagac, K. W. Chan, and E. Farantatos. Impact of Inverter-Based Resources on Negative Sequence Quantities-Based Protection Elements. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , 36, Feb 2021. [156] A. Haddadi, E. Farantatos, I. Kocar, and U. Karaagac. System Protection Guidelines for Systems with Inverter Based Resources: Performance of Line Current Differential, Phase Comparison, Neg-ative Sequence, Communication-Assisted, and Frequency Protection Schemes Under Inverter-Based Resources and Impact of German Grid Code. Electric Power Research Institute Technical Report , Dec 2019. [157] A. Haddadi, E. Farantatos, I. Kocar, and U. Karaagac. Short-Circuit Phasor Models of Inverter-Based Resources for Fault Studies: Model Validation Case Studies. Electric Power Research Institute Technical Report , Dec 2018. [158] A. Haddadi, I. Kocar, T. Kauffmann, and H. Gras. Protection Guide-lines for Systems with High Levels of Inverter Based Resources. 

Electric Power Research Institute Technical Report , Dec 2018. [159] A. Haddadi, I. Kocar, U. Karaagac, and J. Mahseredjian. Advanced Short-Circuit Modeling, Analysis, and Protection Schemes Design for Systems with Renewables. Electric Power Research Institute Technical Report , Oct 2017. [160] A. Haddadi, I. Kocar, U. Karaagac, and J. Mahseredjian. Impact of Renewables on System Protection: Wind/PV Short-Circuit Phasor Model Library and Guidelines for System Protection Studies. Electric Power Research Institute Technical Report , Dec 2016. [161] R. Chowdhury, R. McDaniel, and N. Fischer. Applying Line Current Differential Protection in Systems with Inverter-Based Resources. 

SSRN Electronic Journal , Mar 2022. [162] M. Bini, R. Abboud, P. Lima, and F. Lollo. Challenges and Solutions in the Protection of Transmission Lines Connecting Nonconventional Power Sources. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Western Protective Relay Conference , Jan 2022. [163] M. Nagpal, A. Saeed, R. Rangel, D. Zhang, and R. Chowdhury. Fault Contributions From Inverter-Based Resources: Field Insights and Protection Challenges. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Western Protective Relay Conference , Oct 2025.