Title: 2604.01945v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.01945v1

Published Time: Fri, 03 Apr 2026 00:51:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
1

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

# Model -Free Fast Frequency Support of Wind Farms for 

# Tracking Optimal Frequency Trajectory 

Yubo Zhang, Student Member , IEEE , Songhao Yang, Member , IEEE , Zhiguo Hao, Senior Member , IEEE ,

Baohui Zhang, Fellow, IEEE 

Abstract —The fast frequency support (FFS) towards frequency 

trajectory optimization provides a system view for the frequency 

regulation of wind farms (WFs). However, the existing frequency 

trajectory optimization -based FFS generally relies on the accurate 

governor dynamics model of synchronous generators (SGs), which 

aggrandizes the difficulty of controller implementation. In this 

paper, a proportional -integra l (PI) based FFS of WFs is designed 

for tracking the optimal frequency trajectory, which gets rid of the 

dependence on the governor model. Firstly, the prototypical PI -

based FFS of WFs is proposed and its feasibility for tracking the 

optimal frequency traj ectory is analyzed and demonstrated. Then, 

based on the “frequency -RoCoF” form of the optimal frequency 

trajectory, a more practical PI controller is constructed, avoiding 

the time dependence of the prototypical PI controller. Besides, an 

adaptive gain ass ociated with PI parameters is designed for multi -

WF coordination. Finally, the validity of the proposed method is 

verified in both the single -WF system and the multi -WF system .

Index Terms —Fast frequency support (FFS ), wind farm (WF ),

optimal frequency tr ajectory, proportional -integral (PI) control, 

model -free control .

I. INTRODUCTION 

ITH the large -scale con verter interfaced generators 

(CIGs) connected to the grid, the inertia of the 

power system is seriously diminished  [1] . Low 

inertia significantly increases the over -limit risk of 

the frequency and threatens the safety of power consumption. 

Hence, excavating the potential resources to improve frequency 

safety has attracted extensive attention. 

To meet this urgent demand for power systems , extensive 

research has been carried out on the frequency support of wind 

farms (WFs) . For the existing fr equency support control of 

WFs, the energy source s mainly include de -loading  [2] , energy 

storage  [3] , and rotor kinetic energy (KE) . Both de -loading and 

energy storage enable the W F to provide long -term frequency 

support , as a certain portion of power is reserved. However, the 

energy storage devices require heavy investment whereas the 

de -loading will cause economic losses of wind generation. So ,

the WF owner s generally prefer frequency support control by 

releasing the KE , because the WF can maintain the maximum 

power point tracking (MPPT) operation mode under normal 

conditions. Given the limited KE , the WF operating in MPPT 

mode can only provide short -term frequency sup port. 

In terms of the KE -based frequency support control of WFs, 

the currently mainstream strategies can be roughly divided into 

two types, namely the virtual inertia control (VIC) and the 

stepwise inertia control (SIC) . The core idea of VIC is to 

generate an additional power proportional to the rate of change 

of frequency (RoCoF) and the frequency excursion  [4] . Hence, 

control gain tuning is the key issue of VIC, as it reveals a trade -

off between VIC performance and the safe operation of wind 

turbines (WTs) . Based on the prototypical VIC in  [4] , th e VIC 

with adaptive gains has been studied in  [5-9]. The releasable 

KE -based method was proposed in  [5] , which configured larger 

control gains for the WT with more releasable KE. To prevent 

the possible over -deceleration , the adaptive gain related to real -

time rotor speed was proposed in  [6-9]. By introducing rotor 

speed into the control gain expressions , the frequency support 

is attenuated with the deceleration of WT to ensure its safe ty .

Cons idering the correlation of the frequency support demand 

with the severity of power deficit, the frequency information is 

further introduced into the design of control gains, disturbance 

information -based adaptive gain strategy w as proposed in  [10 -

13 ], such as frequency  [10] , frequency deviation  [11] , RoCoF 

[12] , and both frequency and RoCoF  [13] , aiming at improving 

the adaptability of VIC to different disturbance sizes .

The SIC provides frequency support by directly regulat ing 

the output power of W Fs as the predefined shape. In  [14] , the 

SIC was first proposed to provide a fixed support power and 

then maintain it for a period of time , which effectively alleviates 

the initial unbalanced power and improves the frequency na dir. 

However, the secondary frequency drop (SFD) is inevitable as 

the WTs will produce a large power plunge for speed recovery .

In view of this , some improved SIC strategies are proposed by 

developing a superior power reference curve . In  [15 -17 ], the 

magnitude and duration time of the overproduced power were 

optimized. Besides , different shape s of power reference curves 

were designed in  [18 -22 ], such as straight curve s in the time -

power plane  [18] , straight curve s [19 -21 ], and exponential 

curve s [22]  in the speed -power plane . By optimizing the output 

power reference , the SFD can be effectively suppressed. 

However, both VIC and SIC lack a systematic perspective, 

that is, how to provide better frequency support for the power 

system based on limited KE . Considering the essential intention 

of the fast frequency support (FFS) of WF s is to improv e the 

system freq uency safety , recent research attempts to explor e the 

system -oriented FFS of WFs from the perspective of optimizing 

frequency trajectories . To maximize the frequency nadir, t he 

model predictive control (MPC) was adopted in  [23]  to regulate 

# W       

> This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
> (52007143) ,China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2021M692526) and Key
> Research and Development Program of Shaanxi(2022GXLH -01 -06)
> Y. Zhang, S. Yang, Z. Hao and B. Zhang are with State Key Laboratory of
> Electrical Insulation and Power Equipment, Xi’an Jiaotong Univ ersity, Xi'an,
> China (e -mail: zyb970305@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {songhaoyang, zhghao,
> bhzhang}@xjtu.edu.cn).

2

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

the active power of WFs . However, given the limited prediction 

interval of MPC, the frequency tra jectory in the whole primary 

frequency regulation (PFR) process cannot be sensed at one 

time. In  [24]  and  [25] , a first -order frequency trajectory 

satisfying both the RoCoF and frequency nadir constraints was 

proposed empirically and intuitively . Then , its optimality was 

numerically verified by constructing and solving the optimal 

control model in  [26] . However, the numerical solution is less 

rigorous , and the particle swarm optimization -based solver is 

too complicated to balance the accuracy and computational 

efficiency. From the view of frequency regulation energy, the 

universality of the optimal frequency trajectory was strictly 

proved i n [27] , which was independent of the system model and 

power disturbance . Based on that , a series of FFS strategies 

have been designed to achi eve the optimal frequency trajectory .

In  [24] , t he time -domain optimal frequency trajectory was 

applied in constructing the damping -inertia control for the FFS 

of the inverter. Taking the optimal frequency trajectory as the 

output of the frequency response model , the FFS was reversely 

derived with energy storage  [25]  and WFs  [26 -27 ] as controlled 

plants . However, these model -based FFS schemes rely on 

complex nonlinear governor models and detailed parameters. 

While theoretically sound, these methods may be overly 

idealist ic when applied to large -scale power systems. 

Taking the optimal frequency trajectory as the control goal, 

this paper proposes a PI -based FFS of WFs dispensing with the 

governor modeling . The main contributions are: 

1) The prototype of PI -based FFS is first constructed, and its 

viability for tracking the optimal frequency trajectory is 

analyzed theoretically . Besides, the analytical expression 

of PI parameters is given. The model -free property makes 

the proposed method dispense with governor modeling ,

which significantly simplifies its implementation. 

2) The time -independent PI -based FFS is proposed based on 

the “ frequency -RoCoF” form of the optimal frequency 

trajectory. By reconstructing the generation method of the 

reference signal, the time dependence of the prototypical 

PI controller is eliminated, and the robustness is improved. 

3) An adaptive gain strategy is further designed for mu lti -WF 

coordination. This strategy adaptively adjusts the gain of 

the PI controller according to the kinetic energy of the WF ,

so as to reasonably allocat e FFS tasks among WFs . Since 

only WF local information is needed , it achieves the multi -

WF coordination without extra communication demands. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II briefly 

introduces the optimal frequency trajectory and the model -

based implementation . Section III shows the prototype of the PI 

controller for achieving the optimal frequency trajectory and 

the PI parameters design. Section IV derives the “frequency -

RoCoF” form of optimal frequency trajectory and proposes the 

time -independent PI -based FFS of WFs . The proposed method 

is verified in Section V . Finally, Section V I draws a conclusion. 

II. SYSTEM -VIEW OPTIMAL FRE QUENCY TRAJECTORY 

A. System Frequency Dynamics 

By aggregating the rotor of all synchronous generator s (SGs) ,

one obtains the following average frequency dynamics of the 

power system .2 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) m e fH f t P t P t D f t  =  −  − 

(1)

where H is the system inertia ;fD is the frequency damping 

coefficient that is related to the frequency -dependent nature of 

loads ; f is the system frequency ;mP and eP denote the 

mechanical power and electrical power of the power system .

During the process of PFR , the mechanical power mP can 

be approximated as ( ) ( ) m gov P f s G s =  

(2)

where ( ) gov G s is the model of the governor and turbine system .

Taking the FFS of WFs into consideration, the electrical 

power eP under a power deficit can be expressed as ( ) ( ) e d WF P t P P t = −  

(3)

where dP is the power deficit , which is supposed to be a fixed 

value in this paper ;WF P is the frequency response of WFs .

In this paper, WFs are supposed to operate in the MPPT 

mode normally and only provide FFS by releasing the kinetic 

energy. Hence, the steady -state frequency excursion of the PFR ss f

is unaffected, which is given in (4) according to  [28] .ss d gf P K = − 

(4)

where 1g fK D R= + is the compositive gain of PFR; R is the 

system droop factor .

B. Wind Farm Modeling 

As the capacity of the actual WT is very limited, the term 

“wind farm” is used as the aggregation of WTs to reflect the 

scale effect in this paper. For the convenience of analysis, we 

assume that all WTs in the WF are the same, so the WF can be 

regarded as an equivalent WT with a large capacity. 

The aerodynamic power captured by the turbine blades is 2 3

0.5 ( , )a w pP R v C 

   =

(5)

where  is the air density; R is the turbine radius; wv is the 

wind speed;  is the tip -speed ratio ;r

 is the rotor speed of 

the WT;  is the pitch angle ;pC is the aerodynamic factor .

The mechanical power is transmitted to the generator of the 

WT by a shaft, whose dynamics can be depicted as follow s1 a WT rWT r r

P Pddt J

   = −  

(6)

where WT J is the inertia of the WT. 

In this paper, the active power of the WT under the proposed 

FFS scheme is set as 0WT WT WT P P P= +  

(7)

where 0WT P is the steady -state power of WT before disturbance ;WT P

is the additional power of WT for frequency support. 

Then, the frequency support power of the wind power system 

can be further calculated as ,    

> ,11
> WT i WF NNWF WT ij ij

P P 

> ==

 =   

(8)

where WF N is the number of WFs; ,WT i N is the number of WTs 

in the i-th WF; ,WT ij P is the support power of the j-th WT in 

the i-th WF .3

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

C. Optimal Frequency Trajectory 

Thinking outside of imitating the frequency response of SGs, 

the frequency trajectory optimization -oriented FFS of W Fs has 

attracted much attention recently . The frequency trajectory 

shown in (9) is widely used in  [24 -27 ], which can be regarded 

as an attractive form of the optimal frequency trajectory . That 

is , the frequency drops exponentially to the frequency nadir 

and then mai ntains until the FFS scheme exits , as shown by 

the solid part of the red curve in Fig. 1 (a) .( ) (1 )ft T opt ff t A e−

 = −

(9)

The optimal frequency trajectory satisf ies the following two 

conditions, namely the initial RoCoF and the frequency nadir. (0) 2( )   

> ffdfnadir

f A T P Hf A f

 = = −   = =  

(10 )

where nadir f is the excursion of the frequency nadir. 

According to (10 ), the parameters in (9) can be derived as 2,df fg g

P HA TK K

= − =

(11 )

where nadir ss f f

 =   denotes the ratio of the frequency nadir 

to the steady -stat e frequency , which can be specified accordin g

to operation demands . Fig. 2 shows the support power of WFs 

under different values of  . It can be seen that the smaller of 

, the slower the KE recovery (0WF P  ), and the over -

deceleration risk of W Fs will increase. If 1

 =  , the re covery 

time of KE tends to infinity . The overlong recovery process will 

threaten the safe operation of WFs . Hence , it is recommended 

to be no less than 1.1. The selection of  is not the focus of 

this paper, so there is no further discussion. 

Combined with Fig. 1 , the optimality of the above frequency 

trajectory is further elaborated . Firstly, the optimal trajectory 

eliminates the convex frequency nadir, which is essentially the 

frequency overshoot caused by the response lag of the governor 

system of SGs. Hence, the optimal frequency trajectory means 

an effective coordination between SGs and WFs, th at is, the 

FFS of WFs compensate s for the response lag of SGs .

Secondly, the optimal frequency trajectory can maximize the 

frequency nadir with the same frequency regulation energy. 

This merit of the optimal frequency trajectory has been strictly 

proved in our previous work  [27] . Finally, the shape of the 

optimal frequency trajectory is very simple , and its key 

transient indices can be calculated algebraically, as shown in 

(10 ). This property can significantly simplify the frequency 

security assessment as there is no need for the dynamic 

simulations to get the convex frequency nadir. 

D. Model -based FFS Scheme of WFs And Its Shortcomings 

Taking the optimal frequency trajectory as the desired output 

under the power deficit, the model -based FFS control schemes 

is reversely derived from the system frequency model in  [26] 

and  [27] , with the principle shown in Fig. 3. Specifically, the s-

domain optimal frequency trajectory can be obtained by 

Laplace transform to (9), as follows. ( ) ( 1) 

> fopt f

Af s s T s 

 = +

(12 )

Then , the FFS of WFs can be reversely constructed as ( ) ( ) WF gov wG s G s K= − −

(13 )

where w f gK D K

= − is a constant gain; ( ) gov G s involves 

the governor model of all SGs. 

As shown in (13 ), the model -based FFS of WFs relies on the 

accurate governor dynamics of all SGs , which usually includes 

complicated dynamical equation s and nonlinear characteristics 

such as saturation and clipp ing . For a large -scale power system 

with numerous SGs , the workload of modeling all the governor 

dynamics is heavy , and model errors will inevitably result in 

control performance degradation .          

> Fig. 3Schematic diagram of the model -based FFS of WFs in [26] and [27] .
> Fig. 1 Comparison of the conventional and optimal frequency trajectory .(a)
> Frequency trajectory. (b) Frequency regulation power.
> Fig. 2 Support power of WFs under different values of .

4

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

III. PRO TOTYPE OF PI CONTROLLER FOR FFS OF WF S

To get rid of the governor modeling, a PI -based FFS of WFs 

is proposed in this paper. The core idea is to construct a PI 

controller to regulate the output power of WFs , with optimal 

frequency trajectory tracking as the control goal . The model -

free property of the PI controller endow s the proposed method 

free from governor model ing, so as to improve its application 

potential in actual power system s. The fundamental principles 

are introduced as follows. 

A. Control Prototype 

Given the flexible control of WF s, the system frequency can 

th eoretically be shaped into the desired trajectory by regulating 

the output power of WFs . Therefore , if the desired frequency 

trajectory is known, the following PI -based FFS of WFs can be 

constructed to force the system frequency to track the reference 

frequency , as follows. ( ) ( ) ( ) WF P f I fP t K e t K e t dt  =  +  

(14 )

where ( ) ( ) ( ) f ref act e t f t f t=  −   , which denotes the tracking 

error ;ref f is the reference frequency ;act f is the actual 

frequency; PK and IK are coefficients of the PI controller. 

Substituting (14 ) into (1), one obtains ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )    

> dPI ref act sys PI gov

P G s f ssf s G s G s G s

− +  = + −

(15 )

where ( ) 2sys fG s Hs D= + ,( ) PI P IG s K K s= + .

In this paper, the desired system frequency is exactly the 

optimal frequency trajectory. That is ( ) ( ) ref opt f s f s =  

(16 )

Based on (12 ), the power deficit and the optimal frequency 

trajectory should satisfy the following equation. (2 ) ( ) dg opt 

P Hs K f ss

> 

− = + 

(17 )

where g gK K

 = .

Combining (15 ), (16 ), and (17 ), the frequency response can 

be further expressed as  ( ) 1 ( ) ( ) act R opt f s G s f s = + 

(18 )

where ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )     

> gfgov Rsys PI gov

K D G sG s G s G s G s 

> 

− += + −

(19 )

According to (18 ), t he premise for the system frequency to 

track the optimal frequency trajectory is that the influence of ( ) RG s

can be ignored. Mathematically, it is equivalent to ( ) 1, R low up G s j

   =  

(20 )

where low 

 and up 

 are the lower bound and upper bound of 

the spectrum of opt f . In general, let 0low 

 = .

B. Spectrum of the Optima l Frequency T rajectory 

According to (20 ), it is necessary to study the spectrum of opt f

. The fast Fourier transform (FFT) can be performed by 

Matlab to get the spectrum of optimal frequency trajectory. The 

amplitudes and the frequencies of all FFT components are 

denote d as 0 1 ( 2) { , , , }SNA A A and 0 1 ( 2) { , , , }SN

   , where SN

is the sampling length. To determine the upper bound up 

 ,

the following criterion is adopted. That is, once the ratio of 

cumulative spectral energy to total spectral energy exceeds the 

preset threshold, the maximum frequency is recorded as the 

upper bound. That is 22 20 0

1  

> SNkiiii

A A

 

> ==

 − 

(21 )up k

 =

(22 )

where  is a tolerance coefficient, which is taken as 4

10 − in 

this paper , indicating that the cumulative spectral energy within [ , ]low up 

 

accounts for 99.99% of the total spectral energy. 

Eq. (9) ind icates that the shape of the optimal frequency 

trajectory is impacted by the system parameters, thus affecting 

the spectral upper bound. Given this , the spectral upper bound 

under different system parameters is further verified based on 

the criterion in (21 ). The system parameter range s for sampling 

are listed in TABL E I , which are larger than those of the actual 

power system  [29] . Then, the uniform sampling within the 

range from TABLE I is performed and the spectral upper bound up 



is then calculated . A total of 100,000 samples were taken 

and the statistical results are shown in Fig. 4. The sampling 

results show that the spectral upper bound generally doe s not 

exceed 0.15rad/s under various value s of system parameters. 

Therefore, denoting max 0.15rad s up 

 = ,max 

> up

 is large enough to 

depict the spectral upper bound of the optimal frequency 

trajectory under different power systems .

C. Design of PI P arameters 

The design principle of PI parameters is to make (20 ) hold .

To facilitate analysis, the following simplified governor model 

is adopted in the derivation proce ss. 1( ) (1 )

> gov g

G s R T s 

= − +

(23 )

Fig. 4 Statistical result of spectral upper bound up 

 .     

> TABLE I
> PARAMETER RANGE FOR SAMPLING
> Parameters Lower bound Upper bound
> Power deficit d

P (p.u.)  0.01  0.5       

> Ratio coefficient 15
> System inertia time H(s) 0.1 20
> System damping factor f

D 0 15

> Governor time constant g

T (s)  0 20   

> Aggregated droop factor R0.01 1

5

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

where gT is the time constant of the governor system .

Substituting s j

= into (19 ),( ) RG s can be expressed as ( )( ) ( )   

> num num num RRden den den R

a jb G jG j a jb G j

 += = +

(24 )

where ( )( )( )( )

> 2222

1111121    

> num gfggnum gden PfggIden g

a K DR TTbR Ta K DR TTKb HR T

  

> 

 = − −  +    =  +     = + +  +    = − −  +   

(25 )

Combining (20 ) and (24 ), one obtains ( ) ( ) , num den R R low up G j G j

    

(26 )

Generally, a number that is an order of magnitude smaller 

than another number can be considered to be “far less than”. So ,

the qualitative relationship in (26 ) can be co nverted into the 

following quantitative relationship .10 ( ) ( ) , num den R R low up G j G j

     

(27 )

A sufficient condition for (27 ) to hold is that both the real 

part and the imaginary part of num RG are much smaller than 

those of den RG , that is 10 ( ) ( ) ,10 ( ) ( )   

> num den low up num den

a j a jb j b j

       

(28 )

Then , the value range of PK and IK can be derived as (29 )

with the detailed derivation process exhibited in Appendix A. ( )( ) 

> 2max max max

11max 10 9 2   

> gfup gPggup I

K DR TKK KK R



> 

  − −   +         −  

(29 )

where max () is the function to get the maximum value; max 

> g

T is 

the maximum value of gT . According to TABLE I , we take max 20s gT =

in this paper. It should be noted that max 

> up

 and max 

> g

T

are both constant and do not vary with power system s. 

This property greatly simplifies the PI paramete rs design .

Based on the general design principles of PI controller, the 

value of PK and IK should not be too large. So, the minimum PK

and IK that satisfy (29 ) are recommended to use , that is 00

min( )min( )  

> PPII

K KK K

= =

(30 )

where min() is the function to get the minimum value; 0PK and 0IK

are the recommen ded PI parameters. 

D. Performance Verification of the PI Controller 

According to the design principle of PI parameters shown in 

(29 ), the performance of the P I controller is further verified 

under various power deficits and power systems . Specifically, 

the relative parameters are sampled within the range shown in 

TABLE I, and the corresponding PI parameters are derived by 

(29 ). Then, the optimal frequency trajectory sho wn in (9) and 

the actual system frequency shown in (18 ) can be calculated. 

Finally, the performance of the PI control ler is evaluated by the 

following two relative error indices .max , ,,

max %%  

> act opt opt act nadir opt nadir nadir opt nadir

f fE ff fE f

   −    =      −   =  

(31 )

where max E denotes the maximum relative error of the actual 

system frequency trajectory to the optimal frequency trajectory; nadir E

denotes the relative error of the actual frequency nadir to 

that of the optimal frequency trajectory. ,act nadir f and ,opt nadir f

are the frequency nadir of the actual frequency and the optimal 

frequency trajectory, respectively. 

Similarly with Section III.B, a total of 100,000 sampling tests 

were performed, and the statistical results of t he above two error 

indices are shown in Fig. 5. Within a large range of system 

parameter values, the maximum relative error max E is less than 

8% and the frequency nadir error nadir E is less than 4%, which 

indicate s good consistency between the actual frequency and 

the optimal frequency trajectory . Hence, the validity of the PI 

control for tracking the optimal frequency trajectory is verified .

IV. PROPOSED PI -BASED FFS OF WF S

In Section III, the theoretical feasibility of PI -based FFS for 

tracking the optimal frequency trajectory is proved. However, 

the optimal frequency trajectory in (9) is not appropriate for 

directly constructing the PI controller, as the time dependence 

of the reference signal may impair the control robustness . To 

cope with this problem, the equivalent time -independent form 

of the optimal frequency trajectory is derived for constructing a 

practical PI controller for the FFS of WFs. 

A. Time -independent PI Controller for FFS 

1) Time -independent optimal frequency tra jectory 

According to (9), the RoCoF corresponding to the optimal 

frequency trajectory can be expressed as 

> Fig. 5 Error statistics of frequency trajectories.

6

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < ( ) 2

> ft T dopt

Pf t eH

> −

 = − 

(32 )

Combining (9) and (32 ), the variable t can be eliminated .

Then we obtain the following equivalent form of the optimal 

frequency trajectory. 1( ) ( ) 2 

> dopt opt f

Pf t f tT H

 = −  −

(33 )

This equivalent form reveals the dynamic features of optimal 

frequency trajectory as well as get s rid of the time dependence. 

That is to say, if the RoCoF and the frequency deviation satisfy 

(33 ), the actual frequency is certainly optimal. 

2) Design of time -independent PI controller 

Based on (33 ), the time -independent PI controller for t he FFS 

of WFs is further designed , as shown in Fig. 6. Specifically, t he 

reference RoCoF is firstly derived from the time -independent 

optimal frequency trajectory shown in (33 ) based on the actual 

frequency, and then the reference frequency is generated by 

integrating the reference RoCoF . Finally, the deviation between 

the actual frequency and the reference frequency is fed into the 

PI controller to generate the additional power command of WFs. 

Under the control structure shown in Fig. 6, the additional 

power of WFs can be derived as 2

11 ( ) ( ) ( ) 2   

> dWF PI act PI f

PP G s f s G sT s Hs 

  = − +  −   

(34 )

Substituting (34 ) and (17 ) into (1), the system frequency 

dynamics can be expressed as ( ) 1 ( ) ( ) act R opt f s G s f s

  = +  

(35 )

where ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )     

> gfgov Rsys PI gov

K D G sG s G s G s G s

> 

− += + −

(36 )1( ) 1 ( ) PI PI f

G s G sT s  

> 

 = +   

(37 )

It can be seen that ( ) RG s and ( ) RG s have almost the same 

expression. In Section III C and D, it has been verified that the 

influence of ( ) RG s under the PI parameters selection shown in 

(29 ) can be ignored within the spectral range of max 

[0, ]up 

  .

Naturally, i f the amplitude of ( ) RG s is comparable to that of ( ) RG s

in the spectr al range of max 

[0, ]up 

  ,( ) RG s can be 

ignored in (35 ) likewise .

To verify the validity of the time -independent PI controller, 

the amplitudes of ( ) RG s and ( ) RG s are compared in the 

spectral range of max 

[0, ]up 

  by sampling, with results shown 

in Fig. 7. Specifically , equal interval sampling is performed in 

the spectral range of max 

[0, ]up 

  . For each  , a total of 

10,000 samplings were performed in the parameter value ranges 

listed in TABLE I, and then the amplitudes of ( ) RG s and ( ) RG s

are calculated. The statistical results in Fig. 7 indicate 

that ( ) RG s is smaller than ( ) RG s in the spectral range of max 

[0, ]up 

 

, indicating that ( ) RG s exerts even less influence 

on actual frequency than ( ) RG s . Hence , the item of ( ) RG s can 

be ignored in (35 ), and the proposed control will make the 

actual system frequency track the optimal frequency trajectory. 

B. Adaptive PI Gains for Multi -WF Coordination 

For the multi -WF system, the FFS task required for track ing 

the optimal frequency trajectory should be reasonably allocated 

among all WFs . Given the difference in FFS capability of WFs ,

the following adaptive gains configuration strategy is designed 

for multi -WF coordination without extra communication. 

Generally , the output amplitude of the PI controller can be 

regulated by adjusting the PI parameters . Specifically, under the 

same input, the larger the PI parameters , the larger the output of 

the PI controller . Hence , the proportion of FFS tasks undertaken 

by the WF can be controlled by configuring its PI parameters ,

which is designed as (38 ) in this paper. , 0, 0    

> P i iPI i iI

K c KK c K

=  = 

(38 )

where ,P i K and ,I i K are the PI parameters of the i-th WF; ic is 

the adaptive gain of the i-th WF with the value range of 0 to 1 .

Since the rotor kinetic energy is supposed as the only energy 

source for the W F to provide FFS in this paper , the W F with 

more kinetic energy should undertake more frequency support 

task s accordingly. Therefore , the adaptive gain is designed as min 0, ,max min , ,   

> kik i ik i k i

E Ec E E

−= −

(39 )

where ,  

> 2,,,1

12  

> WT i Nk i WT ij r ij j

E J



> =

= 

(40 )0, k iE

is the steady -state kinetic energy of the i-th WF before 

disturbance ;min ,k i E and max ,k i E are the minimum kinetic energy 

and maximum kinetic energy of the i-th WF. 

Eq. (39 ) show s that the more the steady -state kinetic energy 

of the WF , the larger the PI parameters . Correspondin gly, the 

response power generated by the PI controller is larger , which 

is consistent with the design expectation . Besides, t he proposed         

> Fig. 6 Time -independent PI controller for the FFS of WFs.
> Fig. 7 Statistical results of the amplitude comparison of ( ) RGsand ( ) RGsin
> the spectral range of max
> [0, ]up
> .

7

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

adaptive gain strategy relies only on the local information of the 

WF itself, requiring no extra communication among WFs .

C. Implementation Details 

1) Estimation of power deficit 

As shown in Fig. 6, the power deficit dP is required to be 

known for implementing the proposed method. Based on the 

measured frequency at the point of common coupling (PCC), 

the W F controller can estimate the magnitude of the power 

deficit by using the method proposed in  [30] . That is 1

( 0) (0) 2ˆ WF Ni idiWF 

f t fHP N t=

 + −= −  

# 

(41 )

where ˆdP denotes the estimated value of dP ;if is the local 

frequency measured at the i-th WF; t is the time window for 

ca lculating the RoCoF; 0t = denotes the moment of the power 

deficit event. To balance the influence of t on th e RoCoF 

approximation accuracy and the rapidity of the start -up speed 

of FFS ,t is set to 300 ms in this paper .

2) Exit strategy 

When completing the frequency support , all WT in the WF 

should recover the optimal operating point. According to the 

operating characteristics of the W T, MPPT control can ensure 

the state recovery of the WT. Therefore , a widely -used MPPT -

based exit strategy is adopted  [20] , [21] , [26] . That is, once the 

active power intersects the MPPT curve , the WT exits FFS and 

switches to MPPT control for the rotor speed recover y.

Fig. 8 shows the whole operating trajectory of the WT under 

the combined action of the proposed FFS and the MPPT -bas ed 

exit strategy. In the FFS stage, the WT first increases the output 

power to mitigate the system frequency drop. Then it gradually 

reduces the output power to recover the KE released in the early 

stage. Finally, the MPPT -exit strategy is activated to ens ure that 

the WT returns to the initial steady -state operation point. 

V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 

A. Case Study I: A Single -WF System 

A power system consisting of one SG and one WF is 

constructed in the DIgSILENT/PowerFactory. The total active 

load is 150 MW , i.e. 150MW LP = , with a frequency damping 

factor of 1fD = . The rated capacity of the SG is 20 0MVA ,

with a droop factor of 0.05 R = and inertia time of 4s H = .

The WF is aggregated by 20 DFIG -based WTs with parameters 

listed in TABLE I I. The wind speed is 9 m s  . The power deficit 

is set to be a load surge accounting for 10% of the total active 

load at 2s t = . Ba sed on (41 ), the power deficit is estimated as 

14.2 MW , with a relative estimation error of 5.33%. Then , the 

steady -state frequency excursion is calculated as 0.169Hz − by 

(4). Assuming that the max imum frequency excursion should 

not exceed 0.2Hz  , the value of  can be calculated as 1. 18 .

According to the design principle shown in (30 ), PI para meters 

are set as 0 148 PK = and 0 13.5 IK = .

1) Response characteristics 

The response characteristic of the proposed method is shown 

in Fig. 9. The results indicate that it force s the system frequency 

to track the optimal trajectory by regulating the output power of 

the WF. Once subjected to a power deficit event , the initial 

RoCoF of the system is estimated by the W F according to the 

average RoCoF in the time interval of t , as shown in Fig. 9(a). 

Correspondingly, this average -based estimation method leads 

to a t delay in the response of FFS, as shown in Fig. 9(b). 

Then, the output power of the W F increases under the action of 

the FF S to mitigate the frequency drop. In the stage where the 

frequency is constant, the output power of the W F gradually 

decreases. Once the output power intersects with the MPPT 

power, the W F smoothly switch es back to MPPT control, which 

promotes the recovery of its rotor speed and effectively avoids 

a secondary frequency droop. Under the MPPT control, the W F

gradually returns to the optimal operating point. Accordingly, 

the system frequency also transits to th e steady state value, thus 

completing the PFR. 

2) Adaptivity to the black -box governor model 

As emphasized above, the core merit of the proposed method 

is its adaptivity to the black -box governor model . In this section, 

three types of governor are verified , including the simplified 

governor shown in (23 ) and t wo classical governor models , i.e. 

the IEEEG1 gove rnor and the IEEEG3 governor , as shown in 

Fig. 10 . The detailed parameters of the IEEEG1 and IEEEG3 

governor are exhibited in TABLE VI in Appendix B. Although 

the governor models are given , they are assumed to be unknown 

when the proposed method is applied. The system frequency under 

the above three governor models is shown in Fig. 11(a). T aking                   

> Fig.8 Operating trajectory of the WT under proposed FFS control with exit
> strategy. (a) Power -speed trajectory. (b) Power -time trajectory.
> TABLE II
> PARAMETERS OF THE WIND TURBINE
> Parameter Value
> Rated voltage (kV) 0.69
> Rated capacity (MVA) 5.556
> Rated active power (MW) 5
> Rated wind speed (m/s) 11.0
> Wind turbine diameter (m) 112
> Nominal rotor speed (rpm) 1484.153
> Rotor and turbine inertia (kg ·m2)1993.285
> Maximum rotor speed (p.u.) 1.2
> Minimum rotor speed (p.u.) 0.7

8

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

the simplified governor model as an example, the adaptability 

of the proposed method to the governor parameter varying is 

verified by changing the value of gT , with results shown in Fig. 

11(b). It can be seen that whether for different governor models 

or different governor parameters , the proposed method can 

regulate the output power of W Fs to shape the system frequency 

as the optimal trajectory . Hence, the results verify its excellent 

adaptivity to the black -box governor. 

Based on the IEEEG1 model, t he influence of the modeling 

error of governors on the performance of the proposed method 

and the model -based FFS shown in Fig. 3 is further compared ,

both of which aim at achieving the optimal frequency trajectory. 

It is assumed that there are random model ing errors of the 

governor and different error levels are tested. At each error level, 

1,000 tests have been performed. Specifically, the minimum 

values of the fre quency nadir are listed in TABLE II I. The 

results indicate that the performance of the proposed method is 

not affected by the modeling error of governor s. Admittedly, 

the model -based method can achieve better performance when 

the governor is accurately mod eled. However, it is notably 

impacted by the modeling error level. At 10% modeling error, 

the worst -case frequency nadir under the model -based method 

is reduced to 0.2250Hz − , which is 12.5% lower than the 

expected value . Hence , compared with the model -based method ,

the proposed method has better robustness to the model ing error 

of governors .

3) Comparison validation 

To verify the effectiveness of the proposed method , the other 

three FFS control strategies are performed as comparis on s, namely 

fixed VIC in  [4] , adaptive VIC in  [5] , and SIC in  [14] . Then, the 

performance of the above methods is tested with the frequency 

nadir as the evaluation index. In view of the uncertainty of actual 

power deficit events, the influence of the power deficit magnitude 

on the frequenc y nadir is first tested. Generally, a 10% load surge 

is generally regarded as a severe power deficit event. Hence, the 

power deficit is set to not exceed this upper bound. The frequency 

nadir under a series power deficit is shown in Fig. 1 2(a). It can be 

seen that the frequency nadir under different FFS control strategi es 

is linear with the power deficit magnitude in a certain range, and 

the frequency nadir of the proposed method is higher than other 

methods . Furthermore, the impact of system operating condition s                                         

> Fig. 9Response characteristics of the proposed method.
> Fig. 10 IEEEG1 and IEEEG3 governor model.
> Fig. 11 Verification of model -free property of proposed control. (a) System
> frequency dynamics under different governor models. (b) System frequency
> dynamics under different values of gT.
> TABLE III
> COMPARISON OF FREQUENCY NADIR CONSIDERING MODELING ERRORS
> Modeling error
> level (%) min( )nadir f
> /Hz min( )%
> ref nadir nadir ref nadir
> fff
> −  
> Model -based
> FFS
> Proposed
> FFS
> Model -based
> FFS
> Proposed
> FFS
> 2.5% -0.2096 -0.2108 4.8% 5.4%
> 5. 0% -0.2138 -0.2108 6.9% 5.4%
> 7.5% -0.2187 -0.2108 9.05% 5.4%
> 10% -0.2250 -0.2108 12.5% 5.4%
> Note: 0.2Hz ref nadir f= − denotes the nadir of the optimal frequency trajectory.

9

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

varying on the performance of FFS control strategies is tested with 

the system inertia time as a representative , as shown in Fig. 1 2(b). 

The results show that the decline of system inertia will impair the 

performance of some FFS control strategies, such as fixed VIC and 

SIC . In contrast, the frequency nadir of the proposed method is 

almost not affected by the system inertia time , indicating that it has 

good robustness to the change of system conditions. 

B. Case Stud y II: A Multi -WF System 

A modified IEEE 39 -bus system with 5 WFs is constructed to 

verify the performance of the proposed method in a multi -WF 

system. The st ru cture of the IEEE 39 -bus system is exhibited in 

[31] . Each WF is composed of 80 WTs with a rated power of 

5MW , and the detailed model is the same as in Case I . The 5 WFs 

locate in Bus8, Bus14, Bus16, Bus18, Bus 22, respectively . As for 

the SG s, the IEEEG1 governor is applied, with detailed parameters 

shown in TABLE V II in Appendix B. The initial active load is 

6097.2MW with a damping factor of 1.47 fD = . Taking the sum 

of the rated capacity of all SGs as the base value, the system inertia 

and drooping factor are then calculated as: 4.1289s H = ,1 17 R =

. The potential maximum power deficit is assumed as 

500MW, accounting for about 8.2% of the total active load. Then, 

the steady -state frequency excursion is calculated as 0.163Hz −

under this disturbance . To ensure the frequency nadir be within 0.2Hz 

, the value of  is calculated as 1.226 . Based on (30 ), t he 

PI parameters are set as 0 120 PK = and 0 11.5 IK = .

1) Different types of power deficit event 

Given the various types of power deficit events in the large -scale 

power system, the performance of the proposed method under the 

following two typical power deficit events is tested. 

Load surge : Load16 increases 500MW at2s t = .

Generator tripping : SG G5 trips at 2s t = .

The system frequency trajectories under the above two power 

deficit events are shown in Fig. 1 3, and the maximum frequency 

excursions are listed in TABLE IV. The results indicate that the 

proposed method effectively improves the frequency nadir in 

different types of power deficit s. Compared with fixed VIC and 

adaptive VIC, the maximum frequency excursion is improved 

by 37.01% and 24.39% in the event of load surge, and 33.93% 

and 18.92% in the event of generator tripping. The performance 

improvement is stimulated by breaking the con fine of imitating 

the frequency response characteristics of SG but collaborating 

with SGs. Compared with VIC, the proposed method not only 

improves the frequency nadir but also avoids the problem of 

secondary frequency drop. 

2) Different wind speed distributi on 

Given the influence factors such as terrain and atmosphere, 

the wind speed of WFs may be quite different. In this section, 

the performance of the proposed method is verified when there 

is a wind speed difference in the multi -WF system. Firstly, 

maint ain ing the wind speed of WF2 -5 a t 9m/s, the frequency 

support dynamics of WF1 under a series of wind speed s are 

tested. As shown in Fig. 1 4, with the decrease in the wind speed ,

the adaptive gain coefficient c becomes smaller based on (39 ).

Then, WF1 does generate less support power , and the rotor 

speed drop is significantly alleviated. That is, WF1 takes less 

resp onsibility for system frequency support as the wind speed 

decreases, which prove s the feasibility of adjusting the WF’s 

frequency response by configuring PI gains. 

Based on the above results, the performance of the proposed 

adaptive gain strategy of the PI parameters for the multi -WF 

coordination is further verified. Specifically , the wind speed of 

the five WFs is set as 6.5 m/s , 7.5m/s , 8.5m/s , 9.5m/s, and                   

> Fig. 12 Comparison of frequency nadir under different FFS control strategies.
> (a) Influence of power deficit magnitude. (b) Influence of system inertia time.
> Fig. 13 System frequency trajectory under different frequency support control
> of WTs. (a) Load surge disturbance. (b) SG tripping disturbance.
> TABLE IV
> COMPARISON OF MAXI MUM FREQUENCY EXCURSION
> Load surge Generator tripping
> Fixed VIC [4] -0.3145 Hz -0.2750 Hz
> Adaptive VIC [5] -0.2620 Hz -0.2241 Hz
> SIC [14] -0.2732 Hz -0.2422 Hz
> Proposed control -0.1981 Hz -0.1817 Hz

10 

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

10.5m/s , respectively . Then , the adaptive gain c of each WF 

can be calculated, listed in TABLE V. Meanwhile , the fixed gain 

(1c = for all WFs) is performed as a comparison . As shown in Fig. 

15, all WFs are equally responsible for the FFS task under the fixed 

gain strategy . For the WF operating at a low wind speed, such as 

WF1, it faces the risk of over -deceleration to touch the lower 

bound . The support power and rotor speed dynamics of WF1 are 

detailedly shown in Fig. 1 5(c). The results show that the rotor 

speed of WF1 with fixed gain drops rapidly to the lower bound due 

to excessive frequency support, which increases the risk of stall. In 

contrast, the proposed method limits the support power of low -

wind speed WF by redu cing the PI parameters, thereby 

significantly reducing its over -limit risk in the rotor speed. Since 

the total FFS task is determined, more FFS task is undertaken by 

the high -wind speed WF. Hence , the proposed method makes the 

FFS task reasonably shared am ong WFs. 

3) Compatibility with other FFS control strategies 

Considering a more general situation, the proposed PI -based 

FFS may not be adopted by all WFs . Specifically, the WF1 is 

supposed to adopt different FFS strategies and other WFs 

rem ain the proposed FFS strategy . Fig. 16 shows that when W F1

presents various output characteristics, the proposed FFS can 

still force the remaining WFs to track the optimal frequency 

trajectory. This means the proposed FFS has good compatibility 

with other FFS strategies. That is, the desired control objectives 

can still be achieved without forcing all WFs to execute the 

proposed PI -based FFS .

C. Discussion 

The above results verify the comprehensive performance of 

the proposed method. However, it must be admitted that the 

frequency trajectory optimization -oriented FFS of WFs is in its 

infancy, and its feasibility in the actual power system requires 

further re search. Compared with the most popular VIC scheme ,                          

> Fig. 14 Frequency support dynamics of WF1 under different wind speeds.
> TABLE V
> STEADY -STATE OPERATING PARAMETER S OF WF S
> WF1 WF2 WF3 WF4 WF5 (m s) wv
> 6.5 7.5 8.5 9.5 10.5 0(p.u.) r
> 
> 0.7852 0.9063 1.0387 1.1619 1.2 c
> 0.1332 0.3488 0.6199 0.9053 1.0
> Fig. 15 Comparison of fixed gain and proposed adaptive gain strategies. (a)
> Maximum support power of WFs. (b) Minimum rotor speed of WFs. (c) Output
> power and rotor speed dynamics of WF1.
> Fig. 16 Compatibility of the proposed FFS to other control strategies . (a)
> Output power of WF1 under different FFS strategies. (b) System frequency
> trajectory.

11 

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

the proposed method faces the following challenges .

1) Dependence on system parameter s. Despite getting rid 

of modeling the governor dynamics, it still relies on some 

system parameters such as system inert ia and power deficit, et 

al. Once these parameters cannot be obtained, it will inevitably 

impede the application of the proposed method. Besides, the 

system parameter dependency will increase the implementation 

cost as additional measurement and communicat ion are needed. 

2) Requirement on wind power scale . To shape the system 

frequency into the desired optimal trajectory, the wind power 

scale should be large to provide sufficient KE for frequency 

support. So, the proposed method cannot achieve the desired 

control effect in the scenario with a small scale of wind power. 

Fortunately, parameter estimation is always a vital research 

topic. A lot of effective solutions have been proposed in the 

existing research , such as power deficit estimation in  [32]  and 

inertia estimation in  [33] , which pro vide potential solutions for 

the proposed method. Meanwhile , as the scale of converter -type 

power sources increases, the high controllability and enormous 

frequency support potent ial of the source side enhance the 

plasticity of the system frequency trajectory. Given the pros and 

cons of the proposed method, further research can be carried out 

including but not limited to the following three aspects .

1) Reducing dependence on system parameter s. For large -

scale power systems, it is not always easy to accurately obtain 

system parameters. Hence, reducing the dependence on system 

parameter s is of great significance for the application of the 

method in the actual powe r system. 

2) Coordinat ing with other FFS control s. It is attractive to 

develop an event -driven coordination strategy so that the 

proposed method can work in severe scenario s while 

maintaining the easy -to -implement FFS control in non -severe 

scenarios . In this way, both the performance and the cost of FFS 

of WFs can be considered to optimize the frequency dynamics .

3) Developing other flexible frequency regulation sources .

In addition to WTs, other flexible frequency regulation sources 

such as photovoltaic and energy storage can be considered in 

FFS . Studying the implementation of the optimal frequency 

trajectory -oriented FFS schemes in these flexible frequency 

regulation sources will facilitate expanding the application 

scope of the method. 

VI. CONCLUSION 

In this paper, a PI -based FFS of WFs has been proposed to 

improve the transient frequency safety of the power system. 

Benefiting from the model -free property of the PI controller, the 

proposed method can achieve the optimal frequency trajectory 

without relying on the governor model. The adaptivity to the 

black -box governor model greatly improves the application 

potential in the actual power system as the arduous work of 

governor modeling is completely avoided. Besides , the adaptive 

gain strategy achieves multi -WF coordination without extra 

communication demands . Notably, the proposed FFS has good 

compatibility with other FFS strategies a nd can achieve the 

optimal frequency trajectory without being forced to install on 

all WFs . Finally, s imulation results verify that the proposed 

method is simple to implement but can effectively improve the 

transient frequency sa fety of power system s.

APPENDIX A

DERIVATION OF VALUE RANGE OF PI PARAMETERS 

According to (25 ), it is easy to know that num b and den a are 

larger than 0; den b is generally less than 0 as max 

> up

  is very 

small; and the sign of num a is uncertain. 

Then, according to the sign of num b and den b and the 

quantitative relation shown in (28 ), one obtains 2

10 9 ( , ) 2den den num I gb b b K h T H

= −    −

(42 )

where 22

( , ) 1 

> ggg

h T R T T

=  +  .

As 0

   , the above inequality can be further scaled 2

9 ( , ) 9 ( , ) 2 , 0I g gK h T h T H

   − 

(43 )

The denominator of ( , )gh T

 reaches its minimum value at 1gT

=

, which makes ( , )gh T

 reach its maximum value, i.e. 1

1( , ) ( , ) ( ) 2 

> gg

h T h T h R

 = = =

(44 )

Obvious, 1 ( )h

 is a monotonically increasing function of  ,

which takes its maximum value when  takes its maximum 

value max 

> up

 . For the maximum value of 1 ( )h

 , (43 ) should still 

hold. The n, the value range of IK can be derived as max 19 ( )I up K h



(45 )

As for the value range of PK , it should be discussed in two 

scenarios because the sign of num a is uncertain. Before that, the 

scale is first performed on den a , as follows. ( , )den den P f g Pa a K D g T K

= = + + 

(46 )

where ( )2

1( , )1

> gg

g TR T

 =  +  , which will monotonically 

decrease with respect to  and gT when 0

   and 0gT  .

In the scenario of 0num a  , one obtains ( )10 10 ( , )den P num g f ga K a K D g T



  = − −

(47 )

Based on the monotonicity of ( , )gg T

 , Eq. (47 ) can be 

further expressed as ( )max max 

10 ( , )P g f up gK K D g T



 − −

(48 )

Similarly, the value range of PK can be derived as (49 ) in the 

scenario of 0num a  .( ) ( )10 (0,0) 10 P f g g gK D g K K K 

 + − = −

(49 )

Then, the value range of PK should be the intersection of (48 )

and (49 ).

APPENDIX B

PARAMETERS OF GOVERNORS                           

> TABLE VI
> GOVERNOR PARAMETERS SETTING IN THE SINGLE -WF CASE
> IEEE G1 SH1R1K3K5K7K1T3T4T5T6T7T
> SG 200 420 0.3 0.15 0.3 0.25
> 0.2 0.1 0.25 33.5 0.25
> IEEEG3 SH1PRTRGTPTRTWT11
> 13
> 21
> 23
> 
> SG200 420 0.2 0.05 0.04 3

12 

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

0.75  0.5  1 1.5  1

TABLE VII

GOVERNOR PARAMETERS SETTING IN THE MULTI -WF CASE 

IEEEG1 SH1 R1K3K5K7K1T3T4T5T6T7T

G1  1200  5 17  0.2 0.2  0.35  0.25 

0.2  0.2  0.4  5 6 0.4 

G2  700  4.329  17  0.3  0.32  0.18  0.2 

0.1  0.2  0.3  4 4.5  0.4 

G3 800  4.475  17  0.22  0.22  0.3  0.26 

0.15  0.1  0.4  5.5  5 0.4 

G4 800  3.575  17  0.26  0.28  0.3  0.16 

0.1  0.1  0.2  4 4.5  0.4 

G5 600  4.333  17  0.25  0.3  0.3  0.1 5

0.15  0.15  0.4  5 4 0.5 

G6 800  4.35  17  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.2 

0.3  0.2  0.3  4.5  4.5  0.4 

G7 700  3.771  17  0.25  0.25  0.3  0.2 

0.25  0.1  0.1  4.5  4 0.4 

G8 700  3.471  17  0.2  0.25  0.35  0.2 

0.1  0.15  0.3  5.5  5 0.5 

G9 1000  3.45  17  0.2  0.25  0.35  0.2 

0.3  0.2 5 0.4  5 4 0.5 

G10  1000  4.2  17  0.25  0.3 0.25  0.2 

0.2  0.15  0.3  4 4 0.4 

Note: Other parameters of the IEEEG1 model are given as follows, 0.3 OU = ,0.3 CU = − 

,min 0P = ,max 1P = ,2 0T = ,2 4 6 8 0K K K K= = = = .

REFERENCES 

[1] G. Magdy, A. Bakeer, and M. Alhasheem , “Superconducting energy 

storage technology -based synthetic inertia system control to enhance 

frequency dynamic performance in microgrids with high renewable 

penetration,” Protection Control Modern Power Syst. , vol. 6, pp. 1 –13, 

2021. 

[2] H. Luo, Z. Hu, H. Zh ang, and H. Chen, “Coordinated active power control 

strategy for deloaded wind turbines to improve regulation performance in 

AGC,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 98 –108, Jan. 2019. 

[3] J. Yang, T. Yang, and L. Luo et al., “Tracking -dispatch of a combined 

wind -storage system based on model predictive control and two -layer 

fuzzy control strategy,” Protection Control Modern Power Syst. , vol. 8, no. 

4, pp. 974 -989, Dec. 2023. 

[4] J. Morren, S. W. H. de Haan, W. L. Kling and J. A. Ferreira, “Wind turbines 

emulating inertia and supporting primary frequency control,” IEEE Trans. 

Power Syst. , vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 433 -434, Feb. 2006. 

[5] J. Lee, E. Muljadi, P. Srensen, and Y. C. Kang, “Releasable kinetic energy 

based inertial control of a DFIG wind p ower plant,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. 

Energy , vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 279 –288, Jan. 2016. 

[6] J. Lee, G. Jang, E. Muljadi, F. Blaabjerg, Z. Chen, and Y. C. Kang, “Stable 

short -term frequency support using adaptive gains for a DFIG -based wind 

power plant,” IEEE Trans. E nergy Convers. , vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1068 –1079, 

Sep. 2016. 

[7] X. Peng, W. Yao, C. Yan, J. Wen, and S. Cheng, “Two -stage variable 

proportion coefficient based frequency support of grid -connected DFIG -

WTs,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 962 –974, M ar. 2020. 

[8] D. Yang et al., “Adaptive Frequency Droop Feedback Control -Based 

Power Tracking Operation of a DFIG for Temporary Frequency 

Regulation,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 2682 -2692, 

March 2024. 

[9] Y. Tang, P. Yang, Y. Yang, Z. Zhao and L. L. Lai, “Fuzzy Adaptive 

Frequency Support Control Strategy for Wind Turbines With Improved 

Rotor Speed Recovery,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy , vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 

1351 -1364, April 2024. 

[10] A. Bonfiglio, M. Invernizzi, A. Labella, and R. Procopio, “Design and 

implementation of a variable synthetic inertia controller for wind turbine 

generators,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 754 –764, Jan. 

2019. 

[11] Q. Jiang et al., “Time -Sharing frequency coordinated control strategy for 

PMSG -Based wind turbine,” IE EE J. Emerg. Sel. Topics Circuits Syst. , vol. 

12, no. 1, pp. 268 –278, Mar. 2022. 

[12] A. Ashouri -Zadeh and M. Toulabi, “Adaptive virtual inertia controller for 

DFIGs considering nonlinear aerodynamic efficiency,” IEEE Trans. 

Sustain. Energy , vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 1060 –1067, Apr. 2021. 

[13] W. Chen, T. Zheng, H. Nian, D. Yang, W. Yang, and H. Geng, “Multi -

objective adaptive inertia and droop control method of wind turbine 

generators,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl. , pp. 1 –10, 2023. 

[14] N. R. Ullah, T. Thiringer, and D. Karlsson, “T emporary primary frequency 

control support by variable speed wind turbines –Potential and applications,” 

IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 601 –612, May 2008. 

[15] M. Kheshti , L. Ding, W. Bao, M. Yin, Q. Wu, and V. Terzija, “Toward 

intelligent inertial frequency participation of wind farms for the grid 

frequency control,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. , vol. 16, no. 11, pp. 6772 –

6786, Nov. 2020. 

[16] W. Bao et al., “Analytically derived fixed termination time for stepwise 

inertial control of wind turbines —Part I: Analytical derivation,” Int. J. 

Elect. Power Energy Syst. , vol. 121, Oct. 2020, Art. no. 106120. 

[17] W. Bao, Q. Wu, L. Ding, S. Huang, and V. Terzija, “A hierarchical inertial 

control scheme for multiple wind farms with BESSs based on ADMM,” 

IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy , vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 751 –760, Apr. 2021. 

[18] R. Azizipanah -Abarghooee, M. Malekpour, T. Dra giˇcevi´c, F. Blaabjerg, 

and V. Terzija, “A linear inertial response emulation for variable speed 

wind turbines,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 1198 –1208, 

Mar. 2020. 

[19] M. Kang, K. Kim, E. Muljadi, J. -W. Park, and Y. C. Kang, “Frequency 

control support of a doubly -fed induction generator based on the torque 

limit,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 4575 –4583, Nov. 2016. 

[20] D. J. Yang et al., “Temporary frequency support of a DFIG for high wind 

power penetration,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 3428 –3437, 

May 2018. 

[21] Y. Zhou, D. Zhu, X. Zou, C. He, J. Hu and Y. Kang, “Adaptive Temporary 

Frequency Support for DFIG -Based Wind Turbines,” IEEE Trans. Energy 

Convers , vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 1937 -1949, Sept. 2023. 

[22] M. Kheshti , S. Lin, X. Zhao, L. Ding, M. Yin, and V. Terzija, “Gaussian 

distribution -based inertial control of wind turbine generators for fast 

frequency response in low inertia systems,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy ,

vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 1641 –1653, Jul. 2022. 

[23] G. Zhan g, F. Zhang, L. Ding, K. Meng, and Z. Y. Dong, “Wind farm level 

coordination for optimal inertial control with a second -order cone 

predictive model,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy , vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 2353 –

2366, Oct. 2021. 

[24] L. Xiong, L. Liu, X. Liu, and Y. L iu, “Frequency trajectory planning based 

strategy for improving frequency stability of droop -controlled inverter 

based standalone power systems,” IEEE J. Emerg. Sel. Topics Circuits Syst. ,

vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 176 –187, Mar. 2021. 

[25] Y. Jiang, E. Cohn, P. Vorob ev, and E. Mallada, “Storage -based frequency 

shaping control,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 5006 –5019, 

Nov. 2021. 

[26] M. Sun et al., “Novel Temporary Frequency Support Control Strategy of 

Wind Turbine Generator Considering Coordination With Syn chronous 

Generator,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy , vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 1011 -1020, 

April 2022. 

[27] Y. Zhang, Z. Hao, S. Yang and B. Zhang, “A System -View Optimal 

Additional Active Power Control of Wind Turbines for Grid Frequency 

Support,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst ., pp. 1 –10, 2023. 

[28] P. M. Anderson and M. Mirheydar, “A low -order system frequency 

response model,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 720 -729, Aug. 

1990. 

[29] Y. Shen, W. Wu, B. Wang and S. Sun, “Optimal Allocation of Virtual 

Inertia and Droop Control for Renewable Energy in Stochastic Look -Ahead 

Power Dispatch,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy , vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 1881 -

1894, July 2023. 

[30] V. V. Terzija , “Adaptive underfrequency load shedding based on the 

magnitude of the disturbance estimation,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 

21, no. 3, pp. 1260 –1266, Aug. 2006. 

[31] I. Hiskens, “IEEE PES task force on benchmark systems for stability 

controls report on the 39 -bus 10 -machine system,” IEEE Power Energy Soc ,

2013. 

[32] J. Li, Y. Li, W. Li, S. Yang and Z. Du, “System Power Imbalance 

Estimation Utilizing Linear Component of Local Frequency,” IEEE Trans. 

Power Syst. , vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 2373 -2376, Jan. 2024. 

[33] J. Liu, C. W ang, T. Bi and G. Xu, “Online Estimation of POI -Level 

Aggregated Inertia Considering Frequency Spatial Correlation,” IEEE 

Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 3232 -3244, July 2023 .13 

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

Yu bo Zhang. (S’21) received the B.S. 

degree in electrical engineering from 

Xi’an Jiaotong University, China, in 2019. 

He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree 

in the school of Electrical Engineering in 

Xi’an Jiaotong University. His main field 

of interest includes the control for 

renewable energy, and power system 

frequency stability. 

Songhao Yang. (S’18 -M’19 ) was born in 

Shandong, China, in 1989. He received the 

B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical 

engineering from the Xi’an Jiaotong 

University, Xi’an, China, in 2012 and 2019, 

respectively. Besides, he received the Ph.D. 

degree in electrical and electronic 

engineering from Tokushima University, 

Japan, in 2019. 

Currently, he is an A ssociate Professor at 

Xi’an Jiaotong University. His research interest includes powe r

system stabi lity analysis and control. 

Zhiguo Hao . (M’10 -SM ’23 ) was born in 

Ordos, China, in 1976. He received his 

B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical 

engineering from Xi'an Jiaotong 

University, Xi'an, China, in 1998 and 

2007, respectively. Currently, he is a

Pro fessor with the Electrical Engineering 

Department, Xi'an Jiaotong University. 

His research interest includes powe r

system protection and control. 

Baohui Zhang . (SM‘99 -’F’19 ) was born 

in Hebei Province, China, in 1953. He 

received the M.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees in 

electrical engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong 

University, Xi’an, China, in 1982 and 1988, 

respectively. He has been a Professor in the 

Electrical Engineering Department at 

Xi’an Jiaotong University since 1992. His 

research interests are syste m analysis, 

control, communication, and protection.