Title: Unified Taxonomy for Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection using Deep Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.18941v1

Published Time: Fri, 20 Mar 2026 01:14:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 50

Markdown Content:
# Unified Taxonomy for Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection using Deep Learning 

# Bruna Alves 1* , Armando J. Pinho 1 and S´ onia Gouveia 1* 

1* IEETA/DETI/LASI, University of Aveiro, 3810-193, Aveiro, Portugal. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): bruna.alves@ua.pt; sonia.gouveia@ua.pt; Contributing authors: ap@ua.pt; 

Abstract 

The topic of Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection (MTSAD) has grown rapidly over the past years, with a steady rise in publications and Deep Learning (DL) models becoming the dominant paradigm. To address the lack of systemati-zation in the field, this study introduces a novel and unified taxonomy with eleven dimensions over three parts (Input, Output and Model) for the categorization of DL-based MTSAD methods. The dimensions were established in a two-fold approach. First, they derived from a comprehensive analysis of methodological studies. Second, insights from review papers were incorporated. Furthermore, the proposed taxonomy was validated using an additional set of recent publications, providing a clear overview of methodological trends in MTSAD. Results reveal a convergence toward Transformer-based and reconstruction and prediction mod-els, setting the foundation for emerging adaptive and generative trends. Building on and complementing existing surveys, this unified taxonomy is designed to accommodate future developments, allowing for new categories or dimensions to be added as the field progresses. This work thus consolidates fragmented knowledge in the field and provides a reference point for future research in MTSAD. 

Keywords: Anomaly Detection, Deep Learning, Multivariate Time Series, Novelty Detection, Outlier Detection 

1

> arXiv:2603.18941v1 [stat.ML] 19 Mar 2026

# 1 Introduction 

The rapid advancement of digital technologies and widespread connectivity has led to a significant increase in the deployment of sensors across a wide range of domains. These sensors continuously monitor their surrounding environments, generating large volumes of data - often as Multivariate Time Series (MTS), where multiple variables are recorded simultaneously over time. A key goal in analyzing these data is Anomaly Detection (AD), which refers to the identification of deviations from expected or typical patterns observed within the data (Audibert et al. 2022; Chandola et al. 2009). Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection (MTSAD) has gained relevant atten-tion in recent years, reflected by a growing interest of the scientific community and its widespread adoption across domains such as industrial systems (Ahmed et al. 2017), server monitoring (Su et al. 2019) and spacecraft operations (Hundman et al. 2018). MTSAD approaches offer clear advantages over Univariate Time Series (UTS) meth-ods (Bl´ azquez-Garc´ ıa et al. 2021), as MTSAD involves capturing both the temporal dependencies typical of time series data and the intermetric (aka spatial) dependen-cies that reflect relationships among variables. This spatio-temporal nature of MTSAD approaches enables the detection of distinct anomaly patterns across one, several or all variables simultaneously, which enhances the identification of complex and sub-tle anomalies (Fu et al. 2024b; Guan et al. 2024; He et al. 2020; Tian et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2020). Given the complexity of MTSAD task, con-ventional statistical methods like Vector Autoregressive (VAR) models and classical Machine Learning (ML) approaches, such as K-means clustering and Isolation Forest (IF) (Audibert et al. 2022) originally designed for UTS, fall short in addressing its challenges. In contrast, Deep Learning (DL) models have emerged as state-of-the-art solutions, due to their ability to model non-linear temporal dynamics and dependencies across multiple variables that traditional methods often miss. Reflecting the rapid evolution of the research field, several review papers on MTSAD have been published recently (Belay et al. 2023; Choi et al. 2021; Correia et al. 2024; El Amine Sehili and Zhang 2024; F¨ ahrmann et al. 2024; Li and Jung 2023; Orabi et al. 2024; Pe˜ na and Yohai 2023; Ramezani et al. 2021; Usmani et al. 2024; Zamanzadeh Darban et al. 2024). Some focus on specific topics like evalua-tion metrics (El Amine Sehili and Zhang 2024), Hidden Markov Models (Ramezani et al. 2021) or statistical outlier detection (Pe˜ na and Yohai 2023), while others offer broader surveys on both ML and DL approaches (Belay et al. 2023; F¨ ahrmann et al. 2024; Orabi et al. 2024; Usmani et al. 2024). Some of the reviews propose categoriza-tions specifically for core DL architectures based on Autoencoders (AE), Variational Autoencoders (VAE), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN), Transformers, Hierarchical Temporal Memory (HTM), Temporal Convolutional Networks (TCN), Graph Neu-ral Networks (GNN) and Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) (Belay et al. 2023; Choi et al. 2021; F¨ ahrmann et al. 2024; Usmani et al. 2024; Zamanzadeh Darban et al. 2024). In addition, certain reviews explore AD strategies, typically grouped into reconstruction-based, prediction-based and other variants (Belay et al. 2023; Choi et al. 2021; Correia et al. 2024; Zamanzadeh Darban et al. 2024). A number of reviews also classify methods based on the type of detected anomaly (e.g. time point, time interval 2or full time series) (Correia et al. 2024; Li and Jung 2023; Zamanzadeh Darban et al. 2024), though these categorizations often lack consistency across authors. An important dimension to consider is how DL models capture temporal and spatial dependencies. For instance, Choi et al. (2021) emphasize this distinction and Zamanzadeh Darban et al. (2024) categorize methods as Temporal (T), Spa-tial (S) or Spatio-temporal (ST). Li and Jung (2023) further discuss thresholding techniques, feature extraction and evaluation metrics. Despite these valuable contri-butions, the DL-based MTSAD field still lacks a unified framework. While several reviews cover similar dimensions, they often propose independent and sometimes inconsistent categorizations. Moreover, key aspects remain underexplored, e.g. how spatial and temporal dependencies are jointly modeled in spatio-temporal approaches. To address these gaps and bring more clarity to the field, this paper proposes a taxonomy of DL-based models aiming MTSAD. The taxonomy has eleven key dimen-sions grouped into three main parts, to characterize Input, Output and Model. Building on concepts from recent reviews (Choi et al. 2021; Correia et al. 2024; Li and Jung 2023; Zamanzadeh Darban et al. 2024) and enriched by insights from an extensive screening of literature published between 2019 and 2024 and indexed at Sco-pus ®, (https://www.scopus.com/), the taxonomy organizes MTSAD methods into a coherent and unified framework. The new taxonomy not only facilitates system-atic comparison across existing methods but also highlights opportunities for future research. It aims to serve as a practical guide for researchers and practitioners, as well as a starting point for newcomers to the field. In the near future, the taxonomy is expected to be expanded and refined alongside advances in model architectures, detection strategies and data representations. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the key concepts, problem formulation, performance evaluation methodologies for MTSAD models and benchmarks. Section 3 describes the screening process used to select relevant papers for this review and presents the proposed taxonomy of DL-based approaches for MTSAD. Section 4 provides a visual summary of the literature distri-bution across the key dimensions and discusses representative approaches within each dimension of the taxonomy, highlighting their design choices, strengths, and limita-tions. Section 5 examines the current research paradigm, identifies prevailing patterns, and provides an overview of recent developments, ongoing challenges, and potential future research directions. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper. 

# 2 Concepts, Methods and Benchmarks in MTSAD 

In general terms, an anomaly is an observation (or a set of consecutive temporal obser-vations) that largely deviates from what is considered the normal behavior, which may indicate abnormal or problematic system behavior (Audibert et al. 2022; Chandola et al. 2009). In practice, it is first necessary to define what the “normal” behavior is — typically by relying on a model trained with examples of historical data previ-ously labelled as normal by a domain expert, as it will be discussed shortly. The new data is then flagged as an anomaly when it deviates from the expected range, pattern or structure given the model for the “normal” behavior. It is important to note that 3anomalies are often mistaken for novelties or outliers and while the concepts may over-lap, they also hold fundamental differences. On one hand, all three concepts concern “unusual” data that deviates from what has been defined as the normal pattern. On the other hand, they differ in intent and interpretation: novelties are previously unseen but potentially normal observations and outliers are typically statistically rare events, both not necessarily implying an abnormal system behavior (Pimentel et al. 2014). 

# 2.1 Types of anomalies: temporal versus inter-metric 

When dealing with MTS data, anomalies are likely to arise along the temporal dimension (temporal anomaly) and across different metrics at a given time point (inter-metric anomaly). While a temporal anomaly is typically defined along the temporal axis for each metric (e.g. Point , Contextual or Collective anomaly), the inter-metric anomaly occurs when the relationship between two or more metrics changes within a specific time interval, even if the individual metrics appear normal when considered separated. In practice, a temporal anomaly in a subset of metrics often corresponds to a temporal inter-metric anomaly, since deviations in one metric may affect the correlation with other metrics. Therefore, anomalies in MTS can manifest both tempo-rally and inter-metrically, which require detection methods that capture the temporal dynamics along each metric as well as the relationship across metrics. Figure 1 shows representative examples of anomalies in MTS data. A temporal anomaly typically manifests when the evolution of a single metric deviates from its historical or expected temporal pattern, such as an abrupt spike ( Point anomaly, A), an unexpected devi-ation in a given context ( Contextual anomaly, B) or a subsequence of values that collectively exhibit abnormal behavior ( Collective anomaly, C and D). In contrast, an inter-metric anomaly occurs when the statistical or functional relationship between two or more metrics changes, even if the individual metrics appear normal in isola-tion. This is the e.g. case for the anomaly (C) in Fig. 1 which is also inter-metric as it disrupts the dependency structure between metrics. Several taxonomies have been proposed to categorize anomalies in time series, ranging from the classical framework of Chandola et al. (2009) proposed and adopted for UTS (Audibert et al. 2022; Usmani et al. 2024; Jia et al. 2025) to more recent schemes addressing multivariate and inter-metric dependencies (Li et al. 2021). Chan-dola et al. (2009) proposed the above-mentioned categories, namely Point , Contextual 

and Collective for temporal anomalies. Lai et al. (2021b) refined this taxonomy by subdividing Point anomaly into Global or Local and Pattern anomaly (equivalent to Collective anomaly of Chandola et al. (2009) into Shapelet , Seasonal or Trend .The extension for MTS was introduced by Li et al. (2021), with categories of Tem-poral , Inter-metric and Temporal–inter-metric anomaly. Zamanzadeh Darban et al. (2024) integrated the temporal categories of Lai et al. (2021b) with the multivariate types of Li et al. (2021). Wang et al. (2025a) further refined Inter-metric anomalies into Global–inter-metric (entire metric affected) and Local–inter-metric (correlations disrupted over intervals). As a final note, other surveys classify anomalies by length as Point , Sub-sequence or Sequence (entire time series) anomalies (Bl´ azquez-Garc´ ıa et al. 2021; Correia et al. 2024; Li and Jung 2023). 4Fig. 1 Examples of temporal anomalies in synthetic MTS generated with https://github.com/ datamllab/tods/tree/benchmark/benchmark/synthetic/Generator: (A) Point anomaly in metrics 1 and 2, (B) Contextual in metric 1, (C) Collective in metric 1 and (D) Collective spanning metric 3. The anomaly in (C) is also inter-metric. 

# 2.2 Problem Formulation in MTSAD 

The objective of MTSAD is to detect abnormal patterns while capturing both temporal dynamics and inter-metric dependencies. Formally, the task is to learn a model f that maps the input data X into a known output yf : X → y ∈ { 0, 1}, (1) where typically y = 1 is used to identify anomaly and y = 0 for non-anomaly. The input data X can take different formats. In the simplest case, X := x•,t ∈

RM ×1 is the vector 

x•,t = x1,t x2,t x3,t · · · xM,t 

⊤ (2) that represents the information at time point t = 1 , · · · , T over all m = 1 , · · · , M 

metrics. Alternatively, X := x•,t :t+w ∈ RM ×(w+1) can be a subsequence (or window) of length w + 1 denoted as 5x•,t :t+w = x•,t x•,t +1 · · · x•,t +w

 =



x1,t x1,t +1 · · · x1,t +w

x2,t x2,t +1 · · · x2,t +w

... ... . . . ...

xM,t xM,t +1 · · · xM,t +w

 , (3) which captures both short-term temporal patterns and associations across metrics. This unified notation allows the framework to detect Contextual and Collective anoma-lies besides Point ones, via window-based detection. In certain settings, the raw time series may be further transformed into alternative representations, such as descriptive measures based on sufficient statistics, learned embeddings or even images, that can also serve as input to the model. In classification settings, the model directly provides a binary output ˆ y = f (X)given the input X. On the other hand, a regression model produces an output ˆX =

f (X), which can be a representation (embedding), reconstruction or prediction based on the input data. The anomaly score is then computed as the dissimilarity between the observed X and the model output ˆX,

AS = diss (X, ˆX). (4) Thus, while the regression output is an approximation of X against which deviations are measured, the classification output directly represents the anomaly label of X. It is worth noting that in probabilistic classification, the model predicts P (y = 1 |X) ∈

[0 , 1], which can be interpreted as a continuous anomaly score, making it conceptually close to the regression setting. In both cases, a higher probability or dissimilarity score 

AS indicates a greater likelihood of anomaly. A thresholding rule is then applied to 

AS to obtain the binary output ˆ y as ˆy = g(AS ) = 

(

1, if AS > δ 

0, otherwise , (5) where δ ∈ R+ denotes the decision threshold. The dissimilarity AS is typically computed using a distance or similarity measure, such as correlation or cosine similarity (Levy et al. 2025). Regarding distances, a common choice is the Lp-norm defined as 

∥v∥p =

> n

X

> i=1

|vi|p

! 1

> p

, (6) where v = v1 v2 · · · vn

 ∈ R1×n represents a vector of differences between observed and model output. Different well-known distances arise from this class, namely the Manhattan ( p = 1), Euclidean ( p = 2) and Chebyshev ( p → ∞ ) distance. This concept 6extends to matrices via entry-wise norms, 

∥A∥(p,q ) =



> k

X

> i=1



> n

X

> j=1

|aij |q

 

> p/q



> 1/p

, (7) with A = aij 

 ∈ Rk×n, i = 1 , · · · , k and j = 1 , · · · , n . This includes the Frobenius norm ( p = q = 2), often treated as the Euclidean distance of a matrix. Note that in the literature, the notation ∥ · ∥ 2 can be used ambiguously for both the Euclidean vector norm and the Frobenius matrix norm. Figure 2 illustrates the learning process of the regression model f for MTSAD. The data input X is fed through the model to produce an output which is then compared to the corresponding target using a loss function L that quantifies the error in the model output. The overall error of the model is computed through a cost function L

that aggregates the loss values over N different inputs as 

L = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

Li. (8) This error is backpropagated through the network, enabling the model to update its weights via an optimization algorithm, typically gradient descent. Training is usually performed on a subset of the dataset chosen for that purpose, referred to as the training set. During training, a separate validation set is used to monitor the generalization performance of the model, helping to detect and prevent overfitting. It also guides hyperparameter tuning, often via techniques such as cross-validation (Duda et al. 2000). The test set is then reserved for the final performance evaluation of the model after training and hyperparameter selection. For regression-based anomaly detection, the training set typically consists of examples representing normal behavior (i.e., y =0). Consequently, the model output ˆX is expected to closely match normal patterns. On the other hand, classification models are trained on labeled examples of anomaly (y = 1) and non-anomaly ( y = 0) and the model predicts a label ˆ y ∈ { 0, 1} for each input or optionally a probability P (y = 1 | X).        

> Fig. 2 Schematic representation of the process of learning a regression model f. In case of a classi-fication model, the output of the model would be ˆ yand the loss function would compare it with the know target y,L(y, ˆy).

72.3 Evaluation of an MTSAD methodology 

The performance of AD methods can be assessed using non-binary or binary met-rics (Sørbø and Ruocco 2023). Non-binary metrics assess model performance across varying thresholds, whereas binary metrics evaluate the predictions after applying a specific threshold value, δ. The most commonly used non-binary metrics are the Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic curve (AUROC) and the Area Under the Precision-Recall curve (AUPRC) (Sørbø and Ruocco 2023). Briefly, AUROC sum-marizes the trade-off between the True Positive Rate (TPR) and False Positive Rate (FPR) across different detection thresholds, 

T P R = T P T P + F N , (9) 

F P R = F P F P + T N , (10) where True Positives ( T P ), False Negatives ( F N ), False Positives ( F P ) and True Negatives ( T N ) are defined with anomalies being the positive class. On the other hand, AUPRC summarizes Precision versus Recall across thresholds, where 

P recision = T P T P + F P (11) is the proportion of correctly identified anomalies among all predicted anomalies and 

Recall (equivalent to T P R ) is the proportion of correctly identified anomalies among all true anomalies. In a comparison between these metrics, AUPRC is generally consid-ered more informative for imbalanced problems, which is the typical setting in anomaly detection (Sørbø and Ruocco 2023). In this case, the large T N keeps the F P R low even with many F P , making AUROC less sensitive to errors and less reflective of the ability of the model to detect rare anomalies (Sørbø and Ruocco 2023). All the above-mentioned metrics can be used to evaluate the performance of the model at that particular decision threshold δ. A popular choice in MTSAD problems is the F1-score, 

F1 = 2 × P recision × Recall P recision + Recall , (12) defined as the harmonic mean of Precision and Recall . This measure is particularly suitable for imbalanced datasets as it reflects the ability of the model to detect rare anomalies without being dominated by the large number of non-anomaly samples. MTSAD evaluation is usually based on binary metrics computed using the point-adjustment (PA) strategy (Audibert et al. 2020; Su et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2020; Li et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022c). As illustrated in Fig. 3, PA considers an entire anomaly segment as correctly detected if at least one point of that segment is flagged, treating all points in the segment as True Positives, while points outside segments are evaluated as non-anomaly. This reflects the fact that anomalies often occur over continuous periods and that an alert anywhere in a segment is typically sufficient (Xu et al. 2018). However, PA can overestimate performance and assume homogeneity within segments (Kim et al. 2022; El Amine Sehili and Zhang 2024). To address this, 8Kim et al. (2022) proposed PA%K, which requires a minimum fraction K of point anomalies in a segment to be detected, providing a fairer assessment.  

> Fig. 3 Illustration of the point-adjustment (PA) strategy showing ground truth, model output and adjusted output over time points (circles). Image adapted from (El Amine Sehili and Zhang 2024).

# 2.4 Benchmark MTSAD methodologies and datasets 

Comparing MTSAD methodologies is challenging due to variations in datasets, eval-uation metrics and experimental setups. Several real-world data benchmarks have been widely adopted, including spacecraft datasets (SMAP and MSL (Hundman et al. 2018)), water treatment and distribution systems (SWaT (Goh et al. 2017) and WADI (Ahmed et al. 2017)) and server monitoring environments (SMD (Su et al. 2019) and PSM (Abdulaal et al. 2021)). Synthetic datasets, such as NeurIPS-TS (Lai et al. 2021b), offer controlled anomaly rates and types, facilitating systematic evaluation of model behavior under different conditions. See other examples of data benchmarks in Table 3 of (Zamanzadeh Darban et al. 2024). Several studies have systematically compared state-of-the-art MTSAD methods under controlled conditions (Audibert et al. 2022; Choi et al. 2021; Garg et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023a; Schmidl et al. 2022). For instance, Choi et al. (2021) evaluated ten DL-based methods on SWaT, WADI and MSL datasets, reporting the hyperparame-ters (e.g. window size and learning rate) for reproducibility. In addition, benchmarking toolkits such as TimeEval (Wenig et al. 2022), TODS (Lai et al. 2021a) and TimeSeAD (Wagner et al. 2023) have been developed to facilitate standardized comparisons. Cer-tain models have also become widely adopted benchmarks, including conventional and ML-based approaches like Principal Components Analysis, Matrix Profile, IF and One-class Support Vector Machine (OCSVM) (Audibert et al. 2022; Schmidl et al. 2022), as well as DL-based models such as DAGMM (Zong et al. 2018), LSTM-VAE (Park et al. 2018), OmniAnomaly (Su et al. 2019), MAD-GAN (Li et al. 2019), MSCRED (Zhang et al. 2019), THOC (Shen et al. 2020), USAD (Audibert et al. 2020), GDN (Deng and Hooi 2021) and GTA (Chen et al. 2022c), which are commonly used as baselines in comparative studies. 

# 3 Taxonomy of DL-based approaches for MTSAD 

This paper proposes a taxonomy for DL in MTSAD to provide a structured organiza-tion of the state-of-the-art, unifying the results from the analysis of 409 documents and 12 reviews or evaluation papers. The following sections present the paper screening process and selection criteria, publication trends in the research field and the proposed 9taxonomy in detail. The full list of selected documents and reviews is available at the supplementary material of this paper. 

# 3.1 Paper screening and selection criteria 

The screening process followed the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Sys-tematic reviews and Meta-Analyses) guidelines, covering the stages of identification, screening, eligibility and inclusion/exclusion criteria (Moher et al. 2009). The relevant literature was identified through an automatic search for documents in one of the most extensive abstract and citation databases of peer-reviewed literature (Scopus 

®, https://www.scopus.com/) followed by a manual screening process based on the content of each document. The search procedure was based on the following advanced query string 

TITLE-ABS-KEY("multivariate time series" AND ("anomaly detection" OR "novelty detection" OR "outlier detection" OR "pattern recognition")) AND PUBYEAR > 2018 AND PUBYEAR < 2025 AND LANGUAGE(english) 

to return all documents that included specific search terms (in the title, abstract or keywords field), were published between January 1, 2019 and December 31, 2024, and were written in English. The search was last updated on June 30, 2025, to ensure the inclusion of all publications from 2024 that matched the criteria, as some papers indexed in 2024 were added to the database with a delay. The search term was defined as the intersection of ”multivariate time series” and terms related with AD methods. Since ”anomaly detection”, ”novelty detection” (ND) and ”outlier detection” (OD) are frequently used interchangeably in the literature to refer to the identification of unusual patterns in data, all three terms were included in the search. Additionally, the broader term ”pattern recognition” was considered to include documents that may propose new methodologies, which can overlap with anomaly, novelty or outlier detection, even if these terms are not specifically addressed in the title, abstract or keywords field. The search covered all types of publications, including papers and reviews, available in both journal and conference proceedings formats. No methodological terms (e.g. ”deep learning”) were included to avoid intro-ducing bias towards specific approaches, thus ensuring that the query collected all the relevant literature for this review. The search results were exported into a spreadsheet and the publications were ranked by decreasing citation count to identify the most cited references while elim-inating possible duplicate contributions. The screening process focused on including publications proposing new methodologies for MTSAD. All documents underwent a manual screening process in two consecutive steps: title/abstract evaluation and full-text reading. In the first step, two evaluators analyzed each title/abstract, and publications were excluded if both agreed they did not meet the inclusion criterion. In the second step, the selected documents followed to full-text reading and those meet-ing the criteria were included. Excluded publications fell into several categories, such as 10 1. review articles ;2. other contributions (e.g. explainability methods, tools, datasets, input transfor-mations, handling of missing values and decision rules) or duplicated contribu-tions; 3. applications studies that evaluate specific methods or compare multiple approaches using either benchmark datasets or non-public datasets; 4. publications not addressing AD, ND or OD methodologies explicitly; 5. errata , conference or challenges overviews ;6. not open access , either freely online, or via the Scopus institutional partnership with the University of Aveiro or the University of Porto, Portugal. Articles not avail-able on Scopus were requested via ResearchGate (https://www.researchgate.net/) when possible. After the screening process, the eligible documents were then categorized into three classes, namely conventional, ML- and DL-based approaches, following the clas-sification framework of Audibert et al. (2022). Briefly, according to these authors, conventional approaches estimate model parameters based on the assumption that data is generated from a stochastic process, typically linear and Gaussian. ML-based models, on the other hand, predict outcomes by learning patterns in data without a predefined model, while DL-based approaches refer to models that consist of multiple stacked layers. As previously mentioned, review papers were excluded from the core set of publi-cations analyzed in this review; however, they were used in two complementary ways. First, they served to support the empirical development of the proposed taxonomy. Second, their reference lists were screened to identify additional relevant papers that might have been missed by the initial query. Specifically, references with a high num-ber of citations (i.e., more than 25 citations/year since publication), published between 2019 and 2024 and presenting clear methodological contributions to MTSAD using DL-based approaches, were included in this review. 

# 3.2 Publication trends in MTSAD 

A preliminary analysis of the publication trends was conducted to contextualize the evolution of research activity in the field. Figure 4 presents the number of documents retrieved from Scopus over the years using the defined search query, without applying any time interval restrictions. A total of 1,041 documents were retrieved. A clear turning point in the research landscape appears to be the year 2019, with only 143 documents before, compared to 898 documents published during the 2019–2024 period. The number of publications has steadily increased each year since 2019, reflecting growing interest and accelerated research activity in the field. For this reason, the present review focuses specifically on the period from 2019 to 2024. Figure 5 shows the distribution of the 898 documents retrieved from the 2019– 2024 period after completing the screening and categorization processes. A total of 434 documents were excluded from the analysis based on the above-mentioned criteria. Specifically, 12 were review papers, 70 were other contributions, 16 were duplicates 11 Fig. 4 Annual number of documents retrieved using the search query. A total of 1,040 documents were retrieved, including 142 before 2019 and 898 from 2019 to 2024. The red-shaded area high-lights the 2019–2024 period, which marks a significant growth in publication volume. Chart directly retrieved and adapted from Scopus ®(https://www.scopus.com/). 

and 168 were application-focused studies. Additionally, 106 documents did not explic-itly address the topic of anomaly detection, 50 were errata or overview papers and only 12 were not available through open access or institutional subscriptions. As expected, many of the documents not addressing AD, ND or OD were retrieved through the inclusion of ”pattern recognition” term in the search query. While these studies largely contribute to advancing MTS analysis, via forecasting, clustering or classification strategies, they do not explicitly tackle anomaly, novelty or outlier detection and, therefore, were excluded from this review. In general, title and abstract screening enabled the identification of most documents classified as review papers, those not addressing AD, ND or OD, errata and overview articles, as well as those not available. The remaining documents were assessed in full-text for eligibility. Among the 464 eligible documents, 393 were categorized as DL-based methods and the remaining 71 were focused on conventional or ML-based approaches. This includes methods relying on architectures such as RNN, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), Transformers, among others, but also simpler models, such as Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) models with multiple stacked layers (Li et al. 2023b; Liu et al. 2024b). Note that models combining conventional or ML approaches with DL-based optimization procedures were not included in this review, as they were not considered DL-based models for anomaly detection. This included hybrid approaches e.g. combining Self-Organizing Maps with Deep Reinforcement Learning (Su et al. 2023). 12 Fig. 5 Distribution of the 898 Scopus documents screened from the 2019-2024 period into eligible (green) and excluded (red) categories. Among the 464 eligible, 393 correspond to DL-based methods, the focus of this review. The 434 excluded were based on six criteria (12, 86, 168, 106, 50, 12). 

An additional set of 16 papers proposing DL-based methods were identified through manual screening of the reference lists of review articles, resulting in a final set of 409 publications considered in this review. These additional papers were retrieved from preprint platforms such as arXiv or published in reputable venues, such as the Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, published by the Asso-ciation for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (https://aaai.org/), only indexed in Scopus from 2023 onwards. Despite their exclusion from Scopus indexation service, these papers exhibit high citation counts and are frequently used as benchmarks for evaluating new MTSAD methods, including TimesNet (Wu et al. 2023), TS2Vec (Yue et al. 2022), Anomaly Transformer (Xu et al. 2022), BeatGAN (Zhou et al. 2019), GANF (Dai and Chen 2022), DCdetector (Yang et al. 2023) and THOC (Shen et al. 2020) as examples. 

# 3.3 The proposed taxonomy on MTSAD 

Table 1 presents the proposed taxonomy to organize the DL-based approaches aiming at MTSAD. The taxonomy includes eleven different dimensions grouped into three main parts: Input, Output and Model. Briefly, the Input part characterizes how MTS data is fed into the model, while the Output defines how anomalies are represented and identified once the model processes the data. Finally, the Model part aims to capture different aspects of the DL architecture and training setup. The Input part of the taxonomy is described using three dimensions: Preprocess-ing, Format and Content. The Preprocessing (Yes | No) dimension indicates whether the raw MTS data were transformed, e.g. to enhance trends, seasonality, shape, or to convert it into another representation, like an image or frequency domain. Standard preprocessing steps, such as data cleaning, normalization or imputation, are not con-sidered here. The Format (Point | Window | Image | Window + Image) dimension defines the structure of the input, where Point represents the multivariate informa-tion at a single time step t in a vector format (i.e., eq. (3) with w=0). Window 

13 refers to a matrix of multivariate observations in w> 0 consecutive time steps. An 

Image may be seen as a transformed version of a window, often used to emphasize specific patterns. While also matrix-based, its dimensions may differ from the orig-inal window, depending on the transformation that is applied to the original data. The two matrix representations may also be combined for into Window + Image for-mat. Finally, the Content (Time | Others | Time + Others) dimension describes the nature of the information encoded in the input, whether to capture temporal ordering or encode exclusively other information, such as relationships across variables, across time steps or represent frequency-domain characteristics. Temporal ordering may also be combined with other complementary information. The Output part of the taxonomy includes the dimensions Type, Optimal Threshold, Time-Varying Threshold and Granularity. The Type (Prediction | Recon-struction | Representation | Hybrid) dimension defines how anomaly scores are computed. In the Prediction , Reconstruction and Representation categories, anomaly scores are computed based on prediction error, reconstruction error or deviations in learned representations (either in latent or label space), respectively. The Hybrid cat-egory combines two or more of the previous strategies to take advantage of their complementary strengths. The dimensions Optimal Threshold (Yes | No | Not appli-cable) and Time-Varying Threshold (Yes | No | Not applicable) are self-explanatory, indicating whether thresholding is data-driven or predefined, manually set or based on heuristics, and whether it adapts over time. The category Not applicable refers to methodologies that do not define a Threshold, e.g. those that rely exclusively on non-binary metrics for performance evaluation (see Section 2.3). Finally, the Granularity (Point | Subsequence) dimension indicates the resolution of anomaly labeling. In the 

Point setting, each time step receives an individual anomaly score or label, whereas in the Subsequence setting, labels are assigned to a window or segment of the time series. The Model part of the taxonomy is described using the dimensions Task, Loss Function, T/S Dependency and Feature Extraction. The Task (Classifica-tion | Regression) dimension reflects the learning objective, distinguishing models trained for classifying inputs from those predicting continuous values. The Loss Function (Cross-Entropy | SumE | NLL | ELBO | Adversarial | Contrastive | Multi-objective) dimension captures the optimization criterion used during training. The T/S Dependency (Temporal | Spatial | Sequential T →S | Sequential S →T | Nested | Paral-lel | Others) dimension refers to how the model captures Temporal (T) and Spatial (S) dependencies. Some models focus exclusively on one dimension, while others process both sequentially ( T→S or S→T ), jointly in a Nested , simultaneously in a Paral-lel fashion, or in alternative structures grouped as Others . The Feature Extraction (No | Temporal | Spatial | Spatio-Temporal) dimension indicates whether the model includes an internal module for extracting Temporal , Spatial , Spatio-Temporal features. Models with no such module are labeled as No .

# 3.4 Insights from prior research 

The dimensions of the taxonomy were derived from the analysis of the screened doc-uments and complemented by insights from review papers (Choi et al. 2021; Correia et al. 2024; Li and Jung 2023; Zamanzadeh Darban et al. 2024). This approach allowed 14 Table 1 Proposed taxonomy of DL-based approaches for MTSAD, structured into three main parts and several dimensions that reflect key modeling choices. 

Part Dimension Categories Description Input 

Pre-processing Yes | No Raw TS | Transformed TS Format Point Single time step t (vector format) Window Consecutive time steps (matrix format) Image Transformed version of a window (matrix format) Window + Image Combination of Window and Image Content Time Temporal ordering Others Other types of information Time + Others Temporal ordering combined with other types of information 

Output 

Type Reconstruction Reconstruction error Prediction Prediction error Representation Deviations in learned representations Hybrid Combination of two or more types Optimal Thresholding Yes | No | Not Applicable Data-driven thresholding strategy Time-Varying Threshold Yes | No | Not Applicable Threshold adapts over time Granularity Point / Subsequence Resolution of anomaly labeling 

Model 

Task Classification | Regression Learning objective Loss Function Cross-Entropy | SumE NLL | ELBO | Adversarial Contrastive | Multi-objective Optimization criterion T/S Dependency Temporal Only handles temporal dependencies Spatial Only handles spatial dependencies Sequential T →S Handles temporal dependencies first, followed by spatial dependencies Sequential S →T Handles spatial dependencies first, followed by temporal dependencies Nested Handles both dependencies, embedding one within the other Parallel Handles both dependencies simultaneously, in a parallel fashion Others Handles both dependencies but not sequentially, in a parallel nor in a nested structure Feature Extraction No No feature extraction module Temporal Temporal feature extraction module Spatial Spatial feature extraction module Spatio-Temporal Spatio-temporal feature extraction module 

to derive a unified taxonomy upon prior work while refining it to reflect the current state-of-the-art. Regarding the Input part, Zamanzadeh Darban et al. (2024) pro-posed a categorization focused on the Format dimension, distinguishing between Point 

and Window ; however, screening methodological papers revealed these categories are 15 insufficient to fully characterize MTSAD inputs, motivating the addition of an Image 

category to Format and the introduction of the new dimensions Preprocessing and 

Content . The dimensions of the Output part were also defined based on insights from prior reviews (Choi et al. 2021; Li and Jung 2023; Zamanzadeh Darban et al. 2024). Choi et al. (2021) groups the methodologies based on how the anomaly score is computed (either via reconstruction error, prediction error or dissimilarity) while Zamanzadeh Darban et al. (2024) categorized as forecasting-based, reconstruction-based, representation-based or hybrid. The dissimilarity category broadly aligns with the representation-based category, as both rely on comparisons in transformed feature spaces. Therefore, the categories from Zamanzadeh Darban et al. (2024) were adopted for the Type dimension. For the Threshold dimension, Li and Jung (2023) proposed an extensive taxonomy including fixed , optimal , adaptive , specific and non-parametric 

thresholds. However, this scheme mixes characteristics with computation methods and includes overlapping categories. The current taxonomy simplifies it by proposing two new binary dimensions, Optimal Threshold and Time-varying Threshold . Lastly, the 

Granularity dimension captures the level at which the anomaly detection output is produced, distinguishing between individual time points and (possibly overlapping) sequences of time steps. This differs from the categorization of anomaly types, where (point, subsequence) (Zamanzadeh Darban et al. 2024) or (point, interval, series) (Li and Jung 2023) describe the anomaly type rather than the output resolution. Existing surveys often focus on categorizing the MTSAD models solely based on their underlying architecture (Choi et al. 2021; Zamanzadeh Darban et al. 2024), yet several important modeling aspects should be considered. This review proposes an extended view of the Model part, by incorporating the new Loss Function dimension and by expanding the categories in Feature Extraction and T/S dependency . Choi et al. (2021) discuss various types of loss, including adversarial , reconstruction , prediction 

and negative log-likelihood losses. In the new taxonomy, the Loss Function dimension captures the mathematical form of the loss, while the Type dimension identifies the components used to compute the dissimilarity. Regarding Feature Extraction , the new taxonomy extends previous work (Li and Jung 2023) by not only indicating whether feature extraction is used but also detailing the specific types of features extracted. Finally, the T/S Dependency dimension expands the existing categorizations Tempo-ral , Spatial and Spatio-temporal (Zamanzadeh Darban et al. 2024) by providing a more detailed and structured view of how spatio-temporal dependencies are modeled and the emphasis each method places on them. This includes approaches based on Sequen-tial , Nested , Parallel or Other paradigms. Finally, although Correia et al. (2024) do not explicitly define a taxonomy, they address related aspects that align with the new one: sliding windows and input sequence align with the Input Format dimension; Pre-diction and Reconstruction relate to Output Type ; and model categories (AE, RNN, CNN, Transformers) connect indirectly to Model Feature Extraction or Model T/S dependencies .16 4 Overview of the Literature on the Dimensions of the New Taxonomy 

Figure 6 presents the classification of the 409 categorized models according to the proposed taxonomy. The three Parts of the taxonomy are shown at the innermost circle of the Sunburst. Moving outward, the eleven dimensions of the taxonomy are displayed and the outermost layer corresponds to the specific categories within each dimension. Each model is assigned to exactly one category per dimension. Colors in the chart indicate the number of documents assigned to each category, providing a visual sense of their relative prevalence. For some dimensions, such as Loss Function, Time-varying Threshold and Optimal Threshold, certain papers did not provide explicit information; these cases are represented by the category labeled “n.e.” (not explicit). The following sections provide a more detailed overview of the literature aligned with each dimension of the new taxonomy.  

> Fig. 6 Sunburst chart of 409 categorized documents across the taxonomy. The inner circle shows the Parts, followed by Dimensions and Categories. Colors represent the number of documents and “n.e.” (not explicit) refers to papers that did not explicitly report information for a given dimension. The iterative version of this figure is available at https://github.com/ieeta-pt/DL-MTSAD.

17 4.1 Input: Preprocessing, Format and Content 

The dimensions of the Input include Preprocessing, Format and Content. Regarding 

Content (Time | Others | Time + Others), it is clear that most studies preserve and make use of the temporal ordering of the time series, reflecting its fundamental impor-tance for anomaly detection. Temporal data is typically used independently, and just a subset of studies enhances it with additional attributes such as spatial correlations, temporal dependencies or frequency-driven features. Some studies focus exclusively on non-temporal information, with spatial correlations being the most common, high-lighting the role of relationships among variables in multivariate anomaly detection. In terms of Format (Point | Window | Image | Window + Image), the majority of inputs are structured as Window , which help preserve temporal context and facilitate the detection of Collective and Contextual anomalies, whereas only a few studies make use of time Point . Although most studies utilize a sliding window technique to extract fixed-length windows, temporal segmentation can alternatively be applied, resulting in non-overlapping segments with different lengths (e.g. Yang et al. (2022)). Moreover, some studies convert MTS windows into Image representations to capture temporal or spatial correlations, and just a few combine both Window and Image formats to enrich the input with complementary information. With respect to Preprocessing 

(Yes | No), most studies do not apply any preprocessing step and instead rely directly on raw time series as input. When preprocessing is applied, it typically emphasizes temporal characteristics of the data through filtering, decomposition or multi-scale transformations (Fu et al. 2024a; Xie et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2022a). Other strate-gies focus on frequency-based representations or on explicitly computing spatial and temporal correlations, either alone or combined with raw series, to enrich the input of the DL-model (Tu et al. 2024). The three Input dimensions were defined independently, and the analysis of the categorized papers shows that most MTSAD methods rely on raw MTS in Window for-mat, maintaining the inherent temporal ordering. However, the categorization shows other clear associations between these dimensions, as changes in Content or Format 

usually require Preprocessing , and Format alterations are often tied to Content 

changes. Preprocessing techniques are closely related to the Content of MTS, as they can be used to emphasize or extract specific aspects of the data that are rel-evant for AD. Preprocessing techniques that preserve the temporal content of MTS often aim to highlight key aspects such as trend, seasonality or multi-scale structures. Examples include extracting trend and residual components using moving averages, as in SDDformer (Separation, Decomposition, and Dual Transformer-based autoencoder) (Fu et al. 2024a); seasonal-trend decomposition via STL, as in STL-ConvTransformer (Wu and Dai 2024); Hodrick–Prescott filtering, as in TFAD (Time-Frequency analysis based time series Anomaly Detection) (Zhang et al. 2022a); and multi-scale decom-position via Discrete Wavelet Transforms (DWT), as in Meta-MWDG (Xie et al. 2024). Other preprocessing techniques focus on frequency-based content, transforming time-domain sequences into the frequency-domain to capture amplitude/power infor-mation relevant for detecting anomalies, particularly seasonal patterns. For instance, the STFT-TCAN model employs Short-Time Fourier Transforms (STFT) to extract 18 amplitude features and integrates them with the original temporal data to enrich the representation of the model input (Tu et al. 2024). 

Preprocessing techniques are often used to modify the input Format , e.g. trans-forming MTS from Window into Image representations to better capture temporal or spatial patterns. Traditional approaches for imaging UTS include Recurrence Plots (RP), Markov Transition Fields (MTF) and Gramian Angular Fields (GAF) (Marwan et al. 2007; Wang and Oates 2015). Since these methods are univariate, they are typi-cally applied to each metric individually to extract temporal correlations. For example, T2IAE (Time-series to Image-transformed adversarial Autoencoder) converts a win-dow sequence with m metrics into m images, which are then stacked and fed to the DL-model (Kang et al. 2024). Moreover, some MTSAD models use GAF to capture spatial correlations among metrics by computing angular differences, producing an 

M × M matrix for each time point (Ma and Wang 2024; Zheng et al. 2024a). Other studies employ signature matrices to transform Window into Image , encoding spatial correlations of a subsequence of size w as 

ri,j =

Pwδ=0 xt−δi xt−δj

κ , i, j = 1 , 2, ..., M , (13) where κ is typically set to w but may vary depending on the similarity measure used, such as correlation or cosine similarity (Zhang et al. 2019; Liang et al. 2021; Zhao et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021). Additionally, some approaches generate sets of snapshot images from sliding windows over the MTS, providing a sequence of input images for the DL-model (Zhang et al. 2022c,d,b). Different Preprocessing techniques can also be used to combine multiple For-mats and Content types in the Input. For instance, FMUAD (Forecast-based, Multi-aspect, Unsupervised AD) computes signature matrices using the cosine sim-ilarity between each pair of metrics to capture spatial correlations, and applies the Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) to extract frequency amplitudes from each metric. These two image-based representations, along with the original temporal data, are then processed separately through dedicated modules to model correlation changes, temporal pattern variations and spatial dynamics (Wang et al. 2021). 

# 4.2 Output: Type, Thresholding and Granularity 

Important aspects of the Output include Type, Thresholding and Granularity. The Output Type (Prediction | Reconstruction | Representation | Hybrid) defines how the anomaly score AS is computed. The most common is Reconstruction , followed by Prediction , with Hybrid and Representation -based methods being less frequent. 

Reconstruction methods, such as OmniAnomaly and Interfusion, compute AS from reconstruction errors (Su et al. 2019; Li et al. 2021), USAD (UnSupervised AD on multivariate time series) combines the AS of two adversarial autoencoders (Audibert et al. 2020), and MSCRED (Multi-Scale Convolutional Recurrent Encoder-Decoder) uses poorly reconstructed elements in signature matrices (Zhang et al. 2019). Predic-tion methods, like GDN (Graph Deviation Network) and GTA (Graph learning with Transformer framework for Anomaly detection), compute errors between predicted 19 and actual values (Deng and Hooi 2021; Chen et al. 2022c), while Representa-tion approaches, including TFAD and MTGFlow (Multivariate Time series anomaly detection via dynamic Graph and entity-aware normalizing Flow), compare learned representations or likelihoods (Zhang et al. 2022a; Zhou et al. 2023a). Each type has strengths: briefly Reconstruction captures overall patterns, Prediction detects sudden changes, and Representation captures latent deviations but can be sensi-tive to noise (Zhao et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2023a; Audibert et al. 2020). Hybrid 

methods combine types to mitigate weaknesses, e.g. MTAD-GAT (Multivariate Time-series Anomaly Detection via GAT) sums reconstruction and prediction errors, and MEMTO (Memory-guided Transformer for MTSAD) multiplies latent and input space deviations (Zhao et al. 2020; Song et al. 2023a). Another crucial aspect in the MTSAD model is how the threshold is defined (see (5)) as it directly affects the performance of the model. An Optimal Threshold 

(Yes | No) is data-driven, which occurs in almost all the categorized documents. A 

Time-varying Threshold (Yes | No) adapts over time according to contextual char-acteristics of the data. Most of the screened papers use a constant threshold rather than a time-varying one. A subset of papers choose not to define a threshold, instead employing evaluation metrics that are independent of thresholds (see Section 2.3) (Liu et al. 2024a; Zheng et al. 2024b). Some papers do not explicitly mention whether the implemented thresholds are Time-varying or Optimal. These two dimensions describe different aspects of the threshold. A non-optimal threshold is typically constant, often predetermined based on insights from experts. An Optimal Threshold can be either Time-varying or not. For instance, a time-invariant threshold can be computed based on the training or validation sets by either getting the maximum AS obtained on that dataset or by using the sigma-rule 

δ = μ + zσ, (14) where μ and σ denote the mean and standard deviation of the AS , respectively. The parameter z is a tunable hyperparameter that controls the sensitivity by determining how far a score must deviate from the mean to be considered anomalous. Another typical approach is to designate a specific portion of the training (or validation) set as anomalies and determine δ as the threshold that best distinguishes these anomalies based on their AS .Among the most commonly adopted techniques for threshold selection is the Peaks-Over-Threshold (POT) approach, derived from the second theorem of Extreme Value Theory (EVT). According to this theorem, the distribution of data points that exceed a sufficiently high threshold can be approximated by a Generalized Pareto Distribution (GPD) (Su et al. 2019; Siffer et al. 2017). The GPD distribution function can be written as 

F (s) = P (S − th ≤ s|S > th ) ∼ 1 −



1 + γs β

− 1

> γ

(15) where th is a given threshold, S is a random variable and γ and β are shape and scale parameters of GPD, typically estimated using the Maximum Likelihood Estimate (MLE). The refined anomaly threshold, δ can be computed by 20 δ ≃ th + ˆβ

ˆγ

 qN Nth 

−ˆγ

− 1

!

, (16) where q is the desired proportion of anomalies, N is the number of AS values, Nth 

is the number of these values that are higher than th and ˆ γ and ˆβ are estimates for model parameters (Su et al. 2019; Siffer et al. 2017). Therefore, using this method, two parameters need to be tuned: q and the threshold th . Alternatively, some works use ML-based algorithms for anomaly/outlier detection on top of the anomaly scores or features computed by the DL models. Some examples include the IF, OCSVM and the Local Outlier Factor (LOF) (Nguyen et al. 2021; Liang et al. 2023). Finally, several works perform an exhaustive search over a predefined range of potential thresholds to identify that with the highest F1-score. In this approach, the F1-score is calculated for each candidate threshold in the range, and the optimal threshold δ is selected as the one maximizing the F1-score (Audibert et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2022c; Li et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2022a). Instead of fixing a threshold for the entire inference stage, other approaches have been adapting a Time-varying Threshold . For example, the sigma-rule (14) can be used in a time-varying fashion with an Exponential Weighted Moving Average (EWMA) and an Exponential Weighted Standard Deviation (EWSD) (Matar et al. 2023), or with the Nonparametric Dynamic Thresholding (NDT) method proposed by Hundman et al. (2018). Finally, variations of POT may also be used to adapt the threshold over time, including streaming POT (SPOT) and drift-aware SPOT (DSPOT) (Siffer et al. 2017). Most of the Output Granularity (Point | Subsequence) choices are Point rather than Subsequence . Even when AS is computed at the window level, it is usually mapped to points — commonly the last (Audibert et al. 2020; Kim et al. 2024), but sometimes the first (Zhou et al. 2023b) or middle point (Wang et al. 2023). Point-level 

AS can also be estimated by averaging overlapping windows (Li et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2022a). In contrast, Subsequence methods label entire windows directly (Zhang et al. 2019, 2023b). Although granularity is independent of evaluation, point-level approaches often use point-adjustment to align predictions with segment-level ground truth. Moreover, beyond detecting anomalies at the point or subsequence level, some studies also identify the specific metrics where anomalies occur, enabling fine-grained anomaly detection (He et al. 2023; Shu et al. 2022). 

# 4.3 Model: Task and Loss Function 

The model Task (Regression | Classification) for anomaly detection is usually formu-lated as Regression rather than Classification . Anomalies are rare by nature, leading to highly imbalanced datasets, which makes supervised classification challenging because it requires sufficient labeled examples of both normal and anomalous events. More-over, regression settings do not need labeled data on anomaly for training. Instead, they are typically trained on datasets assumed to be predominantly normal, relying on the fact that anomalies are rare (Audibert et al. 2020; Su et al. 2019). Addition-ally, while classification models directly output a label indicating the presence of an anomaly, regression models compute an AS , providing a measure of anomaly severity. 21 However, classification models avoid the need to define additional parameters, such as thresholds, and in the presence of high-quality labeled data, can perform multi-class anomaly detection (Li et al. 2024; Lin et al. 2020; Qi et al. 2023), distinguishing between different types of anomalies, something regression models cannot achieve. Another key aspect of model training is the optimization criterion, where the Loss Function is used to compute the average loss (or cost) over the entire dataset as pre-sented in (8). The most frequently used loss functions belong to the SumE category, while Multi-objective formulations have also gained significant popularity. Less com-mon alternatives include Cross-Entropy , NLL , ELBO , Adversarial and Contrastive 

losses. Finally, a subset of papers does not explicitly report the mathematical form of the loss function considerd in training. 

Cross-entropy loss functions are among the most widely used in classification tasks, particularly when labels are represented in a one-hot form (i.e. when each class label is represented as a vector of length C with all entries equal to 0 except for a single 1 at the index c = {1, 2, · · · , C } corresponding to the correct class). The general formulation is the Categorical Cross-Entropy (CCE) that is commonly applied in multi-class scenarios 

LCCE = −

> C

X

> c=1

1c(y) log(ˆ pc), (17) where C is the number of classes, 1 c(y) is the indicator function that returns one if 

y = c and zero otherwise, and ˆ pc is the predicted probability for the example y to belong to class c. The Binary Cross-Entropy (BCE) is the particular case of CCE for 

C = 2 and the summation in the CCE reduces to two terms, corresponding to the positive ( c = 1) and negative ( c = 2) classes with probabilities ˆ p1 and ˆ p2 = 1 − ˆp1,respectively. On the other hand, the loss functions adopted in regression settings are typically based on a transformation f (·) of the difference between the observed data X and model output ˆX,

LSumE = f (X − ˆX). (18) These functions are grouped under the category SumE and common choices for f (·)include distance-based functions such as the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) defined as 

LMAE = 1

M w X − ˆX (1 ,1) 

, (19) where X and ˆX are matrices with M metrics and w time points. The Mean Squared Error (MSE) is obtained equivalently by replacing ∥·∥ (1 ,1) with the Frobenius norm 

∥·∥ 2 

> F

and the Root MSE (RMSE) corresponds to its square root. In the vector case (w = 1), the ∥.∥(1 ,1) is replaced by the Manhattan distance || · || 1, while the Frobenius norm is replaced by the Euclidean norm || · || 2. Among these options, MSE is usually selected because it is mathematically convenient, as it is differentiable, which makes optimization using gradient-based methods efficient and stable (Terven et al. 2025). Finally, the SumE category also includes less common loss functions, such as the quantile loss (Abdulaal et al. 2021) and the Huber loss (Elhalwagy and Kalganova 2022; Xu et al. 2023). 22 The Negative Log-Likelihood (NLL) is a general loss function that measures how well a predicted probability distribution matches the observed data, being defined as 

LNLL = − log pθ (y | x), (20) where pθ(y | x) is the model-predicted probability function of y given the input x and the model parameters θ. In classification with one-hot encoding, NLL is equivalent to CCE or BCE. In regression, the choice of pθ is usually assumed as a Normal (gaus-sian) distribution. Minimizing the NLL is equivalent tomaximize the likelihood of the training data, encouraging the model to assign high probability to normal samples (Terven et al. 2025). This approach is commonly followed to train Normalizing Flow (NF) models (e.g. MTGFlow (Zhou et al. 2023a)), which will be described in the next section. Concepts borrowed from information theory can also be applied as loss func-tions. One such example is the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, used to measure the divergence between a probability distribution q and a target distribution p, as KL( p | q) = 

> n

X

> i=1

p (xi) log 

 p (xi)

q (xi)



, (21) where xi is the i-th example and n is the total number of points or discrete outcomes. The KL divergence is also a key component of the Evidence Lower BOund (ELBO) ,commonly maximized when training a VAE, providing a lower bound on the data log-likelihood (Terven et al. 2025). The ELBO is defined as 

LELBO (x) = Eq(z|x)

 log p(x | z) − KL  q(z | x) ∥ p(z), (22) where E ·  is the expected value. The first term is the reconstruction term, measuring how accurately the model can reconstruct the input x from the latent variable z, and the second term penalizes the divergence between the approximate posterior q(z|x)and the prior p(z). If pθ(y | x) is assumed to be Gaussian with fixed variance, then the reconstruction term is proportional to the negative MSE and thus, in practice, this term is often implemented as the MSE loss (Su et al. 2019; F¨ ahrmann et al. 2022). 

Adversarial and Contrastive loss functions are commonly used to enhance model training and representation learning. Adversarial loss frames training as a minimax game between a Generator ( G) and a Discriminator ( D), where D distinguishes real from generated data, and G aims to generate samples indistinguishable from real ones (Goodfellow et al. 2014). This encourages G to closely match the true data distribution, min  

> G

max  

> D

V (D, G ) = Ex∼pdata (x)[log D(x)] + Ez∼pz (z)[log(1 − D(G(z)))] . (23) where D(·) is the probability of a sample to be real, x represents a real sample and 

G(z) is a sample generated from a latent variable z. The first term (maximized by 

D) measures how well D distinguishes real data sampled from the true distribution 

pdata (x), and the second term (maximized by D and minimized by G) measures how well D can distinguish generated samples drawn from pz (z) (Goodfellow et al. 2014; 23 Terven et al. 2025). Contrastive losses, on the other hand, guide the model to dif-ferentiate between similar and dissimilar examples. Positive pairs are generated via augmented views of the same data, while negative pairs are created from distorted or shuffled segments (Le-Khac et al. 2020). The loss maximizes similarity for positive pairs and minimizes it for negative pairs, with common examples including InfoNCE (van den Oord et al. 2019) and NT-Xtent (Chen et al. 2020). Alternative measures, such as KL divergence, can also quantify dissimilarity; for example, DCdetector (Dual attention Contrastive representation learning anomaly detector) uses KL divergence between representations from two temporal views (Yang et al. 2023). Finally, a widely used approach is to combine different loss functions in a Multi-objective formulation, using a composition of multiple (complementary) loss functions. For example, GraphAD combines MSE with the mutual information between two representations, a stable one and a volatility one (Chen et al. 2022b). Moreover, MTAD-GAT combines the forecasting and reconstruction losses, computed respec-tively from RMSE and ELBO. Several studies have been combining the MSE with other losses, e.g. contrastive ones. For instance, the Anomaly Transformer model (Xu et al. 2022) integrates the reconstruction loss (MSE) with the association discrepancy, computed as the symmetrized KL divergence between two data representations, a strategy later adopted by several models (Xiong et al. 2024; Xu et al. 2024). Similarly, CAE-AD (Contrastive Autoencoder for Anomaly Detection) combines reconstruction loss with contextual and instance-level contrastive losses, operating at the window and timestep scales, respectively (Zhou et al. 2022a). 

# 4.4 Model: T/S dependency and Feature Extraction 

Two other important dimensions of the Model part are T/S dependency and Feature Extraction. These dimensions are closely tied to the DL architectures employed within a model. Building on existing taxonomies for DL-based methods (Zamanzadeh Dar-ban et al. 2024; Choi et al. 2021), popular architectures for MTSAD were grouped into temporal architectures comprising RNN, Transformer and TCN, and spatial architec-tures comprising CNN, GNN, AE, VAE and GAN. Other generative architectures, such as Normalizing Flows and Diffusion Models, have also been used in MTSAD despite not directly modeling temporal or spatial dependencies. Normalizing Flows (e.g. MAF and Real NVP) transform a simple base distribution (e.g. Gaussian) into a complex target distribution via invertible mappings, allowing efficient density estima-tion (Kobyzev et al. 2021). In MTSAD, anomalies are assumed to occur in low-density regions (Dai and Chen 2022; Zhou et al. 2023a). Diffusion Models (e.g. DDPM) instead corrupt inputs with noise and learn to reverse this process for reconstruction (Chen et al. 2023; Sui et al. 2024). In practice, these generative models are often combined with spatio-temporal architectures to better capture the complex MTS patterns. The Feature Extraction dimension (No | Temporal | Spatial | Spatio-Temporal) describes whether MTSAD models employ a dedicated module for extracting features. While all models generate deep representations from the MTS, some explicitly target 

Temporal , Spatial or Spatio-Temporal features through a specialized module, which is typically composed of the aforementioned DL architectures. Others, in contrast, rely on a unified approach that does not differentiate between these aspects (No). With 24 respect to this dimension, almost half of the surveyed approaches omit such a stage altogether, opting instead to intertwine feature learning with prediction or reconstruc-tion, as seen in OmniAnomaly (Su et al. 2019). However, when feature extraction modules are explicitly introduced, they predominantly target spatio-temporal features, underlining that both space and time information are key to performing accurate anomaly detection. For example, GTA integrates dilated and graph convolutions to capture spatio-temporal representations that a Transformer subsequently processes (Chen et al. 2022c), while MTAD-GAT makes use of two parallel GNN-based mod-ules followed by an RNN to extract spatio-temporal features that feed both prediction and reconstruction branches (Zhao et al. 2020). By comparison, models that restrict feature extraction to only spatial or temporal aspects are less common and more spe-cialized: GDN extracts spatial features through a GNN-based module (Deng and Hooi 2021), CAE-M (Convolutional Autoencoding Memory) employs a Convolutional AE to obtain spatial features refined in a memory network (Zhang et al. 2023a) and NCAD (Neural Contextual Anomaly Detection) relies on a TCN to capture temporal depen-dencies (Carmona et al. 2022). Literature points to a clear shift toward spatio-temporal representations as the most dominant strategy for feature extraction in recent DL approaches for AD. Regarding T/S dependency (Temporal | Spatial | Sequential T →S | Sequential S→T | Nested | Parallel | Others), spatio-temporal models are more represented than One-dimensional models (either Temporal or Spatial ), with Nested and Other config-urations being more prevalent than Sequential and Parallel structures. The following sections explore how different DL architectures are structured to capture temporal and spatial dependencies according to this T/S classification. 

4.4.1 Temporal Models 

Temporal models usually use Transformers. The Transformer model is an encoder-decoder structure, consisting of a stack of multi-head self-attention mechanisms and feed-forward fully connected layers. The multi-head mechanism of the Trans-former allows this model to capture various relationships within the data, making it especially effective in MTSAD (Vaswani et al. 2017; Tuli et al. 2022). As an exam-ple, TranAD (Transformer-based Anomaly Detection) uses adversarial learning and self-conditioning to train a model consisting of two Transformer encoders and two decoders (Tuli et al. 2022). In contrast, some models rely solely on attention mecha-nisms without using an encoder-decoder structure. For instance, DCdetector adopts a dual-attention contrastive framework that captures both intra- and inter-patch depen-dencies, learning discriminative temporal representations directly from the input time window (Yang et al. 2023). Despite the popularity of Transformer-based models, RNN and TCN are also used within this category (Matar et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2022a). RNN is a broader term that includes traditional RNN, Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) networks and Gated Recurrent Units (GRU). Both LSTM and GRU effectively capture long-term dependencies, achieving similar performances in many applications. However, GRU has a simpler structure and fewer parameters, leading to faster training times (Chung et al. 2014). The Bidirectional RNN (Bi-RNN), including Bi-LSTM and Bi-GRU, uses 25 two hidden layers to capture both past and future context, improving sequence under-standing (Schuster and Paliwal 1997). The TCN is a CNN-based model, which uses causal and dilated one-dimensional convolutions, to capture long-term dependencies in sequential data (Bai et al. 2023). As an example, Zhang et al. (2022a) proposed TFAD, which uses the TCN architecture in the time and frequency branches to extract meaningful information in both domains (Zhang et al. 2022a). 

4.4.2 Spatial Models 

Spatial models focus solely on spatial dependencies and do not explicitly capture temporal dependencies. Typically, MTSAD methods using spatial architectures rely on the sliding window technique during preprocessing to retain temporal information, thus ensuring that the input of the model remains in sequential order (Audibert et al. 2020; Deng and Hooi 2021). Spatial dependencies can be handled explicitly (e.g. via CNN and GNN) or implicitly (e.g. via AE or GAN). On the explicit methods, CNN can extract meaningful features from MTS by using a sequence of convolutional layers (Zhang et al. 2019). GNN can be used to explicitly learn a graph where each node is a sensor (or dimension) and each edge represents the dependency relationship between two sensors (Deng and Hooi 2021). Additionally, GNN can be combined with CNN into Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN) to model node features by aggregating neighbors’ features, or with attention mechanisms into Graph Attention Networks (GAT), assigning varying weights to different neighbors, and enhancing the learning of spatial correlation (Kipf and Welling 2017; Veliˇ ckovi´ c et al. 2018). As an example, GDN learns a graph representing sensor dependencies and applies an attention mechanism to assess their importance, enabling it to predict future sensor values. The prediction process involves an attention function followed by stacked fully connected layers (Deng and Hooi 2021). On the other hand, AE and GAN implicitly capture spatial dependencies through dimensionality reduction. AE map the input into a lower-dimensional space and decode it back to the original space through an encoder-decoder architecture, learning mean-ingful information and data characteristics (Berahmand et al. 2024). Two popular variations of AE widely used in MTSAD are Variational AE (VAE) and Convolutional AE (ConvAE) (Su et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2019). The first introduces probabilistic reasoning into the AE architecture, while the latter incorporates convolutional layers instead of fully connected layers in both the encoder and decoder. GAN train a Gen-erator and the Discriminator through a two-player minimax game (Goodfellow et al. 2014). This architecture introduced the concept of adversarial training, which is widely employed in MTSAD, as it can help detect anomalies with small deviations from nor-mal by increasing the reconstruction error of encoder-decoder structures (Audibert et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2021; Tuli et al. 2022). For example, the USAD model uses adversarial learning to train an AE architecture consisting of an encoder and two decoders. The AE architecture effectively captures spatial dependencies in MTS data, while the adversarial training mechanism amplifies reconstruction errors for anoma-lous inputs. This approach enables USAD to overcome the difficulty of traditional AE in detecting subtle anomalies and the training instability common in GAN (Audibert et al. 2020). 26 4.4.3 Sequential Models (T →S and S →T) 

Sequential models occupy a small portion of the spatio-temporal models. An example of a T→S model was presented by Choi et al. (2020), which developed a GAN-based model and employed a point-wise convolutional layer on top of the generator to extract the temporal dependency. Within the S→T category, Tang et al. (2023) pro-posed the spatial GDN model before the temporal GRU prediction after the attention mechanism. This model first learns the relationships between sensors through GDN and then utilizes a GRU that models temporal information (Tang et al. 2023). As another example, CAE-M uses a ConvAE for deep feature extraction and then con-catenates the latent representation to the reconstruction error, and feeds them into a memory network for prediction. This network performs non-linear prediction through Bi-LSTM followed by an attention mechanism and combines it with linear prediction using an autoregressive (AR) model (Zhang et al. 2023a). Additionally, MST-GAT (Multimodal Spatial-Temporal GAT) employs a multimodal GAT, with three atten-tion modules (multi-head attention, intra-modal attention and inter-modal attention) to capture spatial and multimodal correlations across different dimensions. The out-puts from these attention modules are then concatenated and passed through a TCN to effectively model temporal dependencies (Ding et al. 2023). 

4.4.4 Nested Models 

In Nested models, typically, a temporal model is embedded within an AE a GAN-based model. For instance, several studies have implemented LSTM-AE architectures, where the encoder and decoder structure of an AE is composed of LSTM layers (Kieu et al. 2019; Nguyen et al. 2021). As another example, the OmniAnomaly uses GRU incorpo-rated into a VAE framework to create a stochastic RNN to learn latent representations and capture temporal dependencies (Su et al. 2019). Additionally, DAEMON (adver-sarial Autoencoder anomaly detection interpretation) uses adversarial training in an AE-based model, where encoder and decoder networks consist of 1D-CNN, which apply filters that slide along the temporal dimension, to capture the temporal dependencies (Chen et al. 2021). An example of a GAN-based model is MAD-GAN (Multivariate Anomaly Detection with GAN), which employs an LSTM network as the base model for both the Generator and Discriminator. MAD-GAN considers the entire dimen-sion set simultaneously in order to capture the latent interactions among the different dimensions and uses LSTM to capture temporal dependency (Li et al. 2019). The Nested category also comprise spatio-temporal models embedded in a spatial model. As an example, MSCRED encodes the spatial correlations of signature matrices at different resolutions through a ConvAE and embeds an attention-based ConvLSTM in its architecture to model temporal information (Zhang et al. 2019). The ConvLSTM is an spatio-temporal model that uses convolutional operations inside the LSTM cells instead of the traditional fully connected layers (Shi et al. 2015). MSCRED adds an attention mechanism to this model to adaptively select relevant hidden states (Zhang et al. 2019). Some variations of MSCRED have been proposed (Xie et al. 2023; Yokkampon et al. 2022). Yokkampon et al. (2022) implemented a convolutional VAE as the backbone structure instead of the convolutional encoder-decoder used 27 in MSCRED. Furthermore, Xie et al. (2023) added a VAE before the convolutional decoder, to learn the distribution of the high-level representations of the outputs from ConvLSTM. Using a different DL architecture, Yu et al. (2021) proposed a GAN-based model, where each network was composed of a CNN-LSTM architecture. Unlike ConvLSTM used in the MSCRED model, the CNN-LSTM architecture employs a LSTM network after the convolutional layers. In this case, a time-scale and a spatial-scale convolutional layer are concatenated to extract temporal and spatial features, respectively, before the LSTM further captures temporal dependencies. In another approach, Lian et al. (2023) proposed a model where S→T structure is nested in a GAN architecture. Both the Generator and the Discriminator are composed of a GAT layer to extract spatial correlation followed by a Bi-LSTM and an attention mechanism to capture the temporal dependencies. 

4.4.5 Parallel Models 

Parallel models handle both dependencies simultaneously using a two-branch architec-ture, one dedicated to temporal dependencies and the other to spatial dependencies. Typically, a temporal model is employed in one branch and a spatial model in the other. For example, the STADN (AD Network using Spatial and Temporal informa-tion) models spatial dependencies using a GAT and temporal dependencies using an LSTM. The two feature representations are then concatenated and passed through stacked fully connected layers for prediction (Tian et al. 2023). Similarly, ESTAD (Enhanced Spatio-Temporal constraints end-to-end network for AD) employs a Trans-former encoder to extract temporal features in parallel with a GNN model that learns spatial dependencies. It further introduces constraint tasks in both temporal and spatial domains, such as an autoregressive temporal objective and graph contrastive learning, to enhance spatio-temporal representations (Ge et al. 2024). Parallel models may also use a mirrored architecture, where both branches share the same structure but are adjusted for their respective dependencies. For example, PCAC (Parallel Convolutional Anomaly multi-Classification) employs two parallel sub-networks, each composed of a 1D-CNN architecture followed by an attention mechanism. These branches extract spatial and temporal features in parallel, and the resulting representations are concatenated before classification (Li et al. 2024). Furthermore, BTAD (Bi-Transformer Anomaly Detection) employs a Bi-Transformer architecture to model the two dimensions in parallel, incorporating an enhanced adap-tive multi-head attention mechanism and a modified decoder structure (Ma et al. 2023). 

4.4.6 Other Models 

This category includes spatio-temporal models that do not conform to the aforemen-tioned frameworks, featuring diverse architectures with no consistent organization. As an example, GTA links graph convolutions with hierarchical dilated convolutions on the original MTS to capture both temporal and spatial dependencies (Chen et al. 2022c). Then, the output of this context block serves as input to a Transformer to fur-ther capture temporal dependencies. Additionally, STGAT-MAD (Spatial-Temporal GAT for Multivariate time series AD) uses stackable GAT to capture both feature 28 and temporal correlations across different time scales (Zhan et al. 2022). In a separate study, VGCRN (Variational Graph Convolutional Recurrent Network) integrates mul-tiple GCRN modules, combining GCN with a recurrent structure to capture spatial and temporal dependencies. By stacking these modules, VGCRN enhances the abil-ity to model multilevel temporal dependencies within MTS data. This architecture is combined with a deep embedding-guided probabilistic network to enhance generaliza-tion capacity with hierarchical prior and capture the dependencies between channels in embedding space (Chen et al. 2022a). Within the Others category, some models combine the structures previously described in an hybrid fashion. For instance, a group of models employs a Paral-lel module followed by a Temporal model to capture long-term patterns, resembling a Sequential S →T architecture in which the spatial module is replaced by a paral-lel block. As an example, the MTAD-GAT first employs a 1D-CNN layer to extract high-level features of each TS. Then, the output is processed by two parallel GAT, one time-oriented and the other feature-oriented. The resulting representations are concatenated with the convolution output and fed into a GRU to model long-term dependencies (Zhao et al. 2020). Several adaptations of this model have been pro-posed (Song et al. 2023b; Zhou et al. 2022b; Xiong et al. 2023). In particular, Zhou et al. (2022b) removed the 1D-CNN layer, whereas Xiong et al. (2023) replaced it with a Transformer encoder. Finally, Song et al. (2023b) introduced a multi-head self-attention mechanism before the GRU, alongside a first-order AR model running in parallel to enhance linear prediction. 

# 5 Past, present and future research directions 

The proposed taxonomy is the result of an in-depth analysis of more than 400 papers, manually selected from a set of documents retrieved from Scopus using a reproducible search query. Although the search term “multivariate time series” may appear some-what restrictive, its use ensured the inclusion of relevant contributions while excluding studies that did not explicitly address multivariate settings. The research field of MTSAD is highly active, with several reviews already published in 2025 (Wang et al. 2025a; Paparrizos et al. 2025; Jia et al. 2025). For instance, Jia et al. (2025) present a classification of more than 200 papers based on loss functions. While this perspective is valuable, it does not include the broader methodological dimensions of DL-based MTSAD. The taxonomy introduced in this work thus complements existing surveys and is designed to remain adaptable, allowing new categories or dimensions to be integrated as the field advances. 

# 5.1 Overview until 2024 

Before 2019, MTSAD research was dominated by traditional ML methods, such as clustering, Support Vector Machines and tree-based models, which were valued for their interpretability and their ability to capture anomaly patterns across multiple variables. Although such works were identified in the survey, they were not included in the review since the focus lies on DL-based approaches. Readers interested in ML-based strategies are referred to existing surveys (Bl´ azquez-Garc´ ıa et al. 2021; Paparrizos et al. 29 2025). From 2019 onwards, a clear shift towards DL-based models can be observed. The first wave of contributions, particularly between 2019 and 2022, introduced disruptive architectural innovations, such as OmniAnomaly (Su et al. 2019), MAD-GAN (Li et al. 2019), MSCRED (Zhang et al. 2019), USAD (Audibert et al. 2020), MTAD-GAT (Zhao et al. 2020), GDN (Deng and Hooi 2021), TranAD (Tuli et al. 2022), GTA (Chen et al. 2022c) and Anomaly Transformer (Xu et al. 2022). More recent works, published between 2023 and 2024, tend to focus on incremental improvements, either by fine-tuning existing architectures, modifying loss functions, or refining input and output representations. Nevertheless, notable exceptions remain, with models such as CAE-M (Zhang et al. 2023a) and DCdetector (Yang et al. 2023) introducing novel architectural concepts after 2022. The categorization of 409 articles highlights several trends in the field for 2019– 2024. Most studies rely on raw time series organized into sliding windows while preserving the temporal order, although there is a growing tendency to represent time series as images to capture spatial correlations. Regression-based settings domi-nate, and distance-based losses, such as MSE, remain the most widely adopted, even though hybrid loss functions have been increasingly explored. In temporal/spatial dependency modeling, sequential, nested, and other complex structures prevail, with nested and heterogeneous architectures being particularly common. Moreover, paral-lel structures are gaining visibility due to their scalable nature, enabling simultaneous modeling of multiple dependencies and improving computational efficiency. Dedicated feature extraction modules are relatively rare, but when present, they typically focus on extracting spatio-temporal features. With respect to the output, anomaly scores are most often computed through reconstruction errors, although hybrid strategies that combine reconstruction errors with prediction errors or latent space deviations are gaining popularity. Detection continues to be primarily carried out at the point level, with thresholds that are generally optimal but time-invariant. The choice of architec-ture has also evolved, with Transformers and GNN becoming increasingly prominent. Transformers are particularly effective for temporal modeling, while GNN are widely adopted to capture spatial dependencies. More recent directions include the explo-ration of generative models, such as Normalizing Flows and Diffusion models, as well as contrastive learning strategies. The application of Large Language Models (LLM) to MTSAD is still at an early stage, but their adoption is increasing, reflecting the broader impact of Transformer-based architectures in time series research. The dimensions of the proposed taxonomy are independent, and each article is classified into a single category per dimension. Nevertheless, certain patterns may emerge across dimensions. The most frequent combination includes No Preprocessing, 

Window Format, Time Content, Reconstruction Type, an Optimal but Time-invariant 

Threshold, Point Granularity, Regression Task, ELBO Loss Function, Nested T/S Dependency, and No Feature Extraction module. However, this setup occurs in only 18 out of the 409 categorized papers, highlighting the heterogeneity of approaches. Since the Loss Function, Optimal Threshold and Time-varying Threshold dimensions highly contributed to this variability, they were ignored for subsequent analyses. When ignoring these three dimensions, the number of papers matching this combination rises to 79 out of 409 (i.e. 19.32%). This joint proportion is larger than the product 30 of proportions over each dimension, which correponds to the case of categories being chosen independently ( ∼5%). This indicates a positive association such that that the presence of a category in one dimension increases the likelihood of a category in the remaining dimensions. Figure 7 shows the same analysis conditional on the T/S dependency cate-gories, namely One-dimensional, Sequential, Nested and Parallel models. The One-dimensional (Temporal and Spatial) and Sequential (T →S and S →T) models were grouped, as they display similar patterns. The Others category was excluded due to its high internal variability. One-dimensional and Nested models tend to rely on Recon-struction errors without a Feature Extraction module, whereas Sequential models more often combine Prediction errors with dedicated Spatio-Temporal feature extrac-tion. In all three cases, the joint proportion (One-dimensional: 27.88%; Sequential: 29.51%; Nested: 63.71%) exceeds the proportion expected under independence (One-dimensional: 17.21%; Sequential: 15.26%; Nested: 46.61%), showing that choices across dimensions are not independent. In contrast, Parallel structures typically include a 

Spatio-Temporal module for feature extraction but exhibit no consistent pattern in Type. Within this configuration, all Type categories have the same joint proportion of 13.89%. Thus, removing the Type dimension, the joint proportion rises to 55.26%, compared to 46.18% expected under independence. Overall, this analysis indicates that architectural design choices in MTSAD models are interdependent, forming coher-ent and consistent patterns that vary according to T/S dependency. However, unlike other dependency categories, Parallel structures lack a consistent pattern, suggesting a greater variability in how the categories are combined. 

# 5.2 Some developments in 2025 

A search of publications from 2025 (up to 31 October) using the same criteria as the original taxonomy yielded 320 papers, with 190 selected for detailed examination. The analysis of these papers highlights a research field marked by the stabilization of the categories of the proposed taxonomy and the introduction of hybrid or extensions of the previous formulations. 

Input -related dimensions (Pre-processing, Format and Content) show continuity with earlier years with some broadening. Most recent contributions continue to rely on Window -based formats for modeling subsequences. As examples, Li et al. (2025c) adopt fixed-length sliding windows to capture localized temporal dependencies, while Feng and Niu (2025) introduce multi-resolution pyramid windows that model dynam-ics at multiple temporal scales. Together, these papers exemplify how contemporary research refines rather than replaces traditional window-based representations in MTSAD. At the same time, several studies move beyond purely temporal segmentation by integrating Window+Image representations or frequency-transformed inputs. For instance, Li et al. (2025d) incorporate frequency-domain features alongside temporal windows, and Huang et al. (2025) make use of wavelet-based frequency transforma-tions to enhance multiscale sensitivity. These trends consolidate the Preprocessing 

Input dimension within the taxonomy and highlight a broader shift toward hybrid representations that merge temporal, spatial and frequency-domain information. 31 Fig. 7 Configuration patterns of models across T/S dependency categories (One-dimensional, Sequential, Nested and Parallel). Analysis excluded the Loss Function, Optimal Threshold, and Time-varying Threshold dimensions. 

At the Output level, the categories of Reconstruction and Prediction remain cen-tral, but 2025 research expands the use of Representation -based deviations and Hybrid 

anomaly scores. AD2T (Association Discrepancy Dual-decoder Transformer) combines reconstruction, prediction and association discrepancy in a dual-decoder framework (Li et al. 2025e), while TRLP (Tranformer-based Reconstruction-Limited Probabil-ity) introduces probabilistic scoring based on representation uncertainty (Feng and Niu 2025). Furthermore, adaptive thresholding mechanisms gained traction e.g. Mixer-transformer employs time-varying thresholds to reduce false positives (Fang et al. 2025), while boundary-aware ensembles generate thresholds based on estimated uncer-tainty (He et al. 2025a). Together, these papers reinforce the Hybrid type output 32 category and extend the relevance of Time-varying thresholds . For Granularity , most contributions still detect anomalies at the Point level. For example, methodologies such as MLAD (Multi-task Learning Anomaly Detection) and MGDRF (Multi-Grain Dynamic Receptive Field) explicitly model multi-scale subsequences, yet they assign anomaly scores to each time point by considering its temporal context (Li et al. 2025c; Chen et al. 2025a). These developments indicate that point granularity anomaly detec-tion using window-based inputs remains a primary focus in 2025. The Model part is where 2025 contributions show the greatest methodological innovation. In the Task 

dimension, explicit Classification formulations remain uncommon and Regression con-tinues to dominate, with models learning to identify deviations as anomalies (e.g. (Li et al. 2025c; Feng and Niu 2025; Wang and Li 2025; Liu et al. 2025; Zhu et al. 2025)). Moreover, several 2025 approaches integrate prediction with other representa-tion learning (e.g. contrastive, variational or adversarial) to enhance the discriminative capacity of latent features (e.g. (Qian et al. 2025; Zhang et al. 2025a; Wang et al. 2025b; Yan et al. 2025)). As a consequence, the Loss Function dimension shows some relevant developments. Beyond the classical reconstruction losses ( SumE , ELBO ), the 2025 research incorporates more frequent Contrastive objectives (CARLA (Darban et al. 2025), DMAP-DDCL (Liang and Yin 2025)), Adversarial losses (EH-GAM-EGAN (He et al. 2025c), Quantum GAN (Hammami et al. 2025)) and multi-objective crite-ria that merge reconstruction, prediction and representation learning (AD2T (Li et al. 2025e), STAMP (Chen et al. 2025b)). These advances consolidate the Multi-objective 

category as a mainstream choice for the Loss Function dimension. The T/S Dependency in 2025 shows an evolution beyond the classical Tempo-ral -only or Sequential T →S paradigms. Recent architectures increasingly emphasize explicit and bidirectional modeling of temporal and spatial interactions. For instance, MSTGAD (MTSAD based on multiple spatiotemporal Graph convolution) introduces DTW-based spatio-temporal graphs, aligning temporal similarity with dynamic spatial adjacency to enhance relational reasoning (He et al. 2025b), while HiGraph (Hierar-chical Graph) captures hierarchical dependencies across intra- and inter-series levels, merging local and global context in a unified graph hierarchy (Liang et al. 2025). Sim-ilarly, HYMAN (HYbrid Memory and Attention Network) explicitly separates local temporal attention from global memory aggregation (Li et al. 2025b). Collectively, these designs reinforce the emergence of Nested , Parallel and hybrid dependency cate-gories, marking a shift toward architectures that treat temporal and spatial structures as co-evolving rather than just sequentially coupled. Finally, 2025 research demon-strates clear progress toward Spatio-Temporal feature extraction modules. Examples include the VGATSL (Variational Graph ATtention networks with Self-supervised Learning) that couples variational graph neural networks with self-supervised objec-tives (Gao et al. 2025) and the MemMambaAD, which adopts a state-space model with adaptive memory dynamics (Li et al. 2025a). 

# 5.3 Future research directions and open challenges 

Future MTSAD research is moving toward adaptive, interpretable and scalable spatio-temporal architectures. Graph-Transformer hybrids such as LGAT exemplify the value of unifying attention-based temporal modeling with dynamic graph reasoning for 33 non-stationary data (Wen et al. 2025). Generative models like MAFCD (Multi-level and Adaptive Conditional Diffusion) emphasize multi-view probabilistic learning for robust anomaly synthesis (Wu et al. 2025), while memory-augmented designs such as MemMambaAD enhance long-term contextual memory (Li et al. 2025a). Addition-ally, explainable models like SHAPAttenVAE (Shapley Attention VAE) signal growing attention to interpretability and causal reasoning in the field (Zhang et al. 2025b). Overall, this study confirms that DL-based methods currently dominate the MTSAD landscape. However, some authors question whether this paradigm represents the optimal path forward (Audibert et al. 2022; Wu and Keogh 2023). Although DL methods tend to handle large datasets more efficiently than conventional or ML-based approaches, there is no conclusive evidence that the first consistently outperform the latter across a wide range of datasets and real-world conditions. Moreover, repro-ducibility remains a major obstacle for adoption in real scenarios, as multiple factors, including model design, hyperparameter settings and computational resources influ-ence results. These challenges suggest that the field should not rely exclusively on DL-based paradigms. In certain applications, classical approaches, ML-based methods or hybrid frameworks may offer more suitable and interpretable solutions. Further-more, integrating domain knowledge through expert systems into data-driven models represents a promising direction, combining the strengths of artificial intelligence with human expertise to improve robustness, reliability and applicability in real-world anomaly detection tasks. One final note concerns the evaluation of MTSAD methods, which relies heavily on a limited set of benchmark datasets. This review does not detail benchmark datasets, as this has been covered elsewhere (Zamanzadeh Darban et al. 2024; Garg et al. 2022). Nonetheless, concerns remain about the reliability of widely used datasets such as MSL (Hundman et al. 2018), SMAP (Hundman et al. 2018) and SMD (Su et al. 2019). Wu and Keogh (2023) argue that these benchmarks may create an illusion of progress due to trivial anomalies, mislabeled instances and unrealistic conditions. The field thus requires new, high-quality and diverse datasets to enable a fair comparison between the approaches and a genuine quantification of the advancements of the research field. 

# 6 Conclusions 

This paper presents a thorough and detailed systematic literature review of DL–based methods for MTSAD, offering a comprehensive perspective of a rapidly expand-ing research field. A novel and unified taxonomy is introduced, encompassing eleven dimensions grouped into three main parts: Input, Model, and Output. Together, these dimensions provide a structured and unified way to compare and classify DL-based methods for MTSAD. Designed with sufficient detail to systematically distinguish among different approaches, yet flexible enough to accommodate future develop-ments, this taxonomy captures the essential characteristics that define the diversity of methods in the field. This comprehensive tool was developed based on the analysis of methodological papers and on the insights of previous review papers. The categorization of 409 papers 34 offers a snapshot of the current research landscape, highlighting dominant method-ologies and emerging paradigms. Furthermore, the taxonomy was validated on an additional set of papers published 2025, confirming its relevance and adaptability to ongoing developments in the field. Moreover, an analysis of the associations between dimensions showed a tendency for specific model architectures to align with particular output types, highlighting that methodological choices are often interdependent, with certain categories frequently co-occurring. This paper presents a framework that enables the development of novel methods, supports informed methodology choices, and guides future research toward address-ing open challenges in MTSAD. By analyzing current trends, identifying underlying patterns, and highlighting emerging directions, it offers researchers and practitioners a practical tool to understand and navigate the field. 

Supplementary information. The supplementary material includes a full list of selected documents and reviews analysed in this paper. 

# Declarations 

# Funding 

This work was supported by IEETA (https://www.ieeta.pt/, UID/00127) through the funding of the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Tech-nology (FCT, https://www.fct.pt/, https://ror.org/00snfqn58), in the scope of the R&D Grants UID/00127/2025 (https://doi.org/10.54499/UID/00127/2025) and UID/PRR/00127/2025. B.A. acknowledges the individual PhD scholarship (ref. 2024.00557.BD), funded by national funds through FCT. 

# Conflict of interest 

The authors declare no conflict of interest. 

# References 

Abdulaal A, Liu Z, Lancewicki T (2021) Practical approach to asynchronous multi-variate time series anomaly detection and localization. In: Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min. (KDD ’21), pp 2485–2494, https://doi.org/10. 1145/3447548.3467174 Ahmed CM, Palleti VR, Mathur AP (2017) WADI: a water distribution testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical systems. In: Proc. Int. Workshop Cyber-Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., CySWATER ’17, pp 25–28, https://doi.org/ 10.1145/3055366.3055375 Audibert J, Michiardi P, Guyard F, et al (2020) USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detec-tion on multivariate time series. In: Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min. (KDD’20), pp 3395–3404, https://doi.org/10.1145/3394486.3403392 35 Audibert J, Michiardi P, Guyard F, et al (2022) Do deep neural networks contribute to multivariate time series anomaly detection? Pattern Recognit 132. https://doi. org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2022.108945 Bai S, Kolter JZ, Koltun V (2023) An empirical evaluation of generic convolutional and recurrent networks for sequence modeling. arXiv:1803.01271 Belay MA, Blakseth SS, Rasheed A, et al (2023) Unsupervised anomaly detection for iot-based multivariate time series: Existing solutions, performance analysis and future directions. Sensors 23(5). https://doi.org/10.3390/s23052844 Berahmand K, Daneshfar F, Salehi ES, et al (2024) Autoencoders and their applica-tions in machine learning: a survey. Artif Intell Rev 57(2). https://doi.org/10.1007/ s10462-023-10662-6 Bl´ azquez-Garc´ ıa A, Conde A, Mori U, et al (2021) A review on outlier/anomaly detec-tion in time series data. ACM Comput Surveys 54(3). https://doi.org/10.1145/ 3444690 Carmona CU, Aubet FX, Flunkert V, et al (2022) Neural contextual anomaly detection for time series. In: Proc. Int. Jt. Conf. Artif. Intell., IJCAI’22, pp 2843–2851, https: //doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2022/394 Chandola V, Banerjee A, Kumar V (2009) Anomaly detection: A survey. ACM Comput Surveys 41(3). https://doi.org/10.1145/1541880.1541882 Chen L, Gao X, Liu J, et al (2025a) A multivariate time series anomaly detection method with multi-grain dynamic receptive field. Knowl-Based Syst 309. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2024.112768 Chen T, Kornblith S, Norouzi M, et al (2020) A simple framework for contrastive learning of visual representations. In: Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML’20), pp 1597–1607, URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/chen20j.html Chen T, Zheng B, Liu S, et al (2025b) Compatible unsupervised anomaly detection with multi-perspective spatio-temporal learning. In: IEEE Int. Conf. Data Eng. (ICDE’25), pp 4066–4078, https://doi.org/10.1109/icde65448.2025.00303 Chen W, Tian L, Chen B, et al (2022a) Deep variational graph convolutional recur-rent network for multivariate time series anomaly detection. In: Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML’22), pp 3621–3633, URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/ chen22x.html Chen X, Deng L, Huang F, et al (2021) DAEMON: Unsupervised anomaly detec-tion and interpretation for multivariate time series. In: IEEE Int. Conf. Data Eng. (ICDE’21), pp 2225–2230, https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDE51399.2021.00228 36 Chen X, Qiu Q, Li C, et al (2022b) GraphAD: A graph neural network for entity-wise multivariate time-series anomaly detection. In: Proc. Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Dev. Inf. Retr., SIGIR ’22, pp 2297–2302, https://doi.org/10.1145/3477495.3531848 Chen Y, Zhang C, Ma M, et al (2023) ImDiffusion: Imputed diffusion models for multivariate time series anomaly detection. Proc VLDB Endow 17(3):359–372. https://doi.org/10.14778/3632093.3632101 Chen Z, Chen D, Zhang X, et al (2022c) Learning graph structures with trans-former for multivariate time-series anomaly detection in iot. IEEE Internet Things J 9(12):9179–9189. https://doi.org/10.1109/jiot.2021.3100509 Choi K, Yi J, Park C, et al (2021) Deep learning for anomaly detection in time-series data: Review, analysis, and guidelines. IEEE Access 9:120043–120065. https: //doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3107975 Choi Y, Lim H, Choi H, et al (2020) GAN-based anomaly detection and localization of multivariate time series data for power plant. In: IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data Smart Comput. (BigComp’20), pp 71–74, https://doi.org/10.1109/BigComp48618. 2020.00-97 Chung J, Gulcehre C, Cho K, et al (2014) An empirical evaluation of generic convolutional and recurrent networks for sequence modeling. arXiv:1803.01271 Correia L, Goos JC, Klein P, et al (2024) Online model-based anomaly detection in multivariate time series: Taxonomy, survey, research challenges and future direc-tions. Eng Appl Artif Intell 138. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2024.109323 Dai E, Chen J (2022) Graph-augmented normalizing flows for anomaly detection of multiple time series. In: Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR’22), URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=45L dgP48Vd Darban ZZ, Webb GI, Pan S, et al (2025) CARLA: Self-supervised contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly detection. Pattern Recognit 157. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2024.110874 Deng A, Hooi B (2021) Graph neural network-based anomaly detection in multivariate time series. In: Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI’21), pp 4027–4035, https: //doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v35i5.16523 Ding C, Sun S, Zhao J (2023) MST-GAT: A multimodal spatial–temporal graph attention network for time series anomaly detection. Inf Fusion 89:527–536. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2022.08.011 Duda RO, Hart PE, Stork DG (2000) Pattern Classification, 2nd edn. John Wiley & Sons, URL https://www.wiley.com/en-us/Pattern+Classification%2C+ 2nd+Edition-p-9780471056690 37 El Amine Sehili M, Zhang Z (2024) Multivariate time series anomaly detection: Fancy algorithms and flawed evaluation methodology. In: Perform. Eval. Benchmark. (TPCTC’23), p 1–17, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-68031-1 1 Elhalwagy A, Kalganova T (2022) Multi-channel lstm-capsule autoencoder network for anomaly detection on multivariate data. Appl Sci 12(22). https://doi.org/10. 3390/app122211393 F¨ ahrmann D, Damer N, Kirchbuchner F, et al (2022) Lightweight long short-term memory variational auto-encoder for multivariate time series anomaly detection in industrial control systems. Sensors 22(8). https://doi.org/10.3390/s22082886 F¨ ahrmann D, Mart´ ın L, S´ anchez L, et al (2024) Anomaly detection in smart environ-ments: A comprehensive survey. IEEE Access 12:64006–64049. https://doi.org/10. 1109/ACCESS.2024.3395051 Fang X, Chen Y, Bhuiyan ZA, et al (2025) Mixer-transformer: Adaptive anomaly detection with multivariate time series. J Netw Comput Appl 241. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.jnca.2025.104216 Feng Y, Niu Y (2025) Time series anomaly detection via reconstruction-limited prob-ability estimation. In: Pattern Recognit. Artif. Intell. (ICPRAI’24), pp 447–461, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-8702-9 30 Fu S, Gao X, Li B, et al (2024a) Multivariate time series anomaly detection via sepa-ration, decomposition, and dual transformer-based autoencoder. Appl Soft Comput 159. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2024.111671 Fu S, Gao X, Zhai F, et al (2024b) A time series anomaly detection method based on series-parallel transformers with spatial and temporal association discrepancies. Inf Sci 657. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2023.119978 Gao Y, Qi J, Ye H, et al (2025) Variational graph attention networks with self-supervised learning for multivariate time series anomaly detection. IEEE Trans Instrum Meas 74:1–13. https://doi.org/10.1109/tim.2024.3502890 Garg A, Zhang W, Samaran J, et al (2022) An evaluation of anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst 33(6):2508–2517. https://doi.org/10.1109/tnnls.2021.3105827 Ge D, Dong Z, Cheng Y, et al (2024) An enhanced spatio-temporal constraints network for anomaly detection in multivariate time series. Knowl-Based Syst 283. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2023.111169 Goh J, Adepu S, Junejo KN, et al (2017) A dataset to support research in the design of secure water treatment systems. In: Crit. Inf. Infrastruct. Secur. (CRITIS’16), pp 88–99, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-71368-7 8 38 Goodfellow IJ, Pouget-Abadie J, Mirza M, et al (2014) Generative adversarial networks. arXiv:1406.2661 Guan S, He Z, Ma S, et al (2024) Multivariate time series anomaly detection with variational autoencoder and spatial–temporal graph network. Comput Secur 142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2024.103877 Hammami W, Cherkaoui S, Wang S (2025) Enhancing network anomaly detection with quantum gans and successive data injection for multivariate time series. In: IEEE Int. Wirel. Commun. Mob. Comput. Conf. (IWCMC’25), pp 1667–1672, https: //doi.org/10.1109/iwcmc65282.2025.11059562 He P, Tan X, Cheng Y (2025a) Boundary-aware adversarial ensemble learning for multivariate time series anomaly detection. Knowl-Based Syst 327. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.knosys.2025.114168 He Q, Zheng YJ, Zhang C, et al (2020) MTAD-TF: Multivariate time series anomaly detection using the combination of temporal pattern and feature pattern. Complexity 2020. https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/8846608 He S, Guo M, Yang B, et al (2023) Fine-grained multivariate time series anomaly detec-tion in iot. Comput Mater Continua 75(3):5027–5047. https://doi.org/10.32604/ cmc.2023.038551 He S, Guo Q, Li G, et al (2025b) Multivariate time series anomaly detection based on multiple spatiotemporal graph convolution. IEEE Trans Instrum Meas 74:1–14. https://doi.org/10.1109/tim.2024.3493890, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TIM. 2024.3493890 He Y, Chen X, Miao D, et al (2025c) Graph-enhanced anomaly detection framework in multivariate time series using graph attention and enhanced generative adversarial networks. Expert Syst Appl 271. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2025.126667 Huang Y, Liu P, Han R, et al (2025) FreqWave-TranDuD: A multivariate time series anomaly detection method based on wavelet and fourier transforms. IEEE Access 13:68384–68397. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2025.3557571 Hundman K, Constantinou V, Laporte C, et al (2018) Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric dynamic thresholding. In: Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., KDD ’18, pp 387–395, https://doi.org/10. 1145/3219819.3219845 Jia X, Xun P, Peng W, et al (2025) Deep anomaly detection for time series: A survey. Comput Sci Rev 58. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosrev.2025.100787 Kang J, Kim M, Park J, et al (2024) Time-series to image-transformed adversarial autoencoder for anomaly detection. IEEE Access 12:119671–119684. https://doi. 39 org/10.1109/access.2024.3450709 Kieu T, Yang B, Guo C, et al (2019) Outlier detection for time series with recurrent autoencoder ensembles. In: Proc. Int. Jt. Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI’19), pp 2725– 2732, https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2019/378 Kim H, Kim S, Min S, et al (2024) Contrastive time-series anomaly detection. IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng 36(10):5053–5065. https://doi.org/10.1109/tkde.2023. 3335317 Kim S, Choi K, Choi HS, et al (2022) Towards a rigorous evaluation of time-series anomaly detection. In: Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI’22), pp 7194–7201, https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v36i7.20680 Kipf TN, Welling M (2017) Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks. In: Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR’17), https://doi.org/https://doi. org/10.48550/arXiv.1609.02907 Kobyzev I, Prince SJ, Brubaker MA (2021) Normalizing flows: An introduction and review of current methods. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 43(11):3964–3979. https://doi.org/10.1109/tpami.2020.2992934 Lai KH, Zha D, Wang G, et al (2021a) TODS: An automated time series outlier detection system. In: Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI’21), pp 16060–16062, https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v35i18.18012 Lai KH, Zha D, Xu J, et al (2021b) Revisiting time series outlier detection: Defini-tions and benchmarks. In: Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS’21) Datasets and Benchmarks, URL https://datasets-benchmarks-proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2021/hash/ec5decca5ed3d6b8079e2e7e7bacc9f2-Abstract-round1.html Le-Khac PH, Healy G, Smeaton AF (2020) Contrastive representation learning: A framework and review. IEEE Access 8:193907–193934. https://doi.org/10.1109/ access.2020.3031549 Levy A, Shalom BR, Chalamish M (2025) A guide to similarity measures and their data science applications. J Big Data 12(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40537-025-01227-1 Li D, Chen D, Jin B, et al (2019) MAD-GAN: Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative adversarial networks. In: Artif. Neural Netw. Mach. Learn. (ICANN’19): Text and Time Series, pp 703–716, https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-030-30490-4 56 Li D, Zhang S, Sun Y, et al (2023a) An empirical analysis of anomaly detection meth-ods for multivariate time series. In: IEEE Int. Symp. Softw. Reliab. Eng. (ISSRE’23), pp 57–68, https://doi.org/10.1109/issre59848.2023.00014 40 Li G, Jung JJ (2023) Deep learning for anomaly detection in multivariate time series: Approaches, applications, and challenges. Inf Fusion 91:93–102. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.inffus.2022.10.008 Li G, Ge M, Wan J, et al (2025a) MemMambaAD: Memory-augmented state space model for multivariate time series anomaly detection. Eng Appl Artif Intell 158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2025.111308 Li H, Xu H, Peng W, et al (2023b) Multi-scale sampling based MLP networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series. In: IEEE Int. Conf. Parallel Distrib. Syst. (ICPADS’23), pp 1421–1428, https://doi.org/10.1109/icpads60453.2023.00202 Li J, Chen Y, Xing Y, et al (2025b) HYMAN: Hybrid memory and attention network for unsupervised anomaly detection. In: IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP’25), pp 1–5, https://doi.org/10.1109/icassp49660.2025.10890028 Li K, Tang Z, Liang S, et al (2025c) MLAD: A multi-task learning framework for anomaly detection. Sensors 25(13). https://doi.org/10.3390/s25134115 Li S, Wang Z, Wang X, et al (2025d) Frequency-enhanced and decomposed transformer for multivariate time series anomaly detection. Appl Intell 55(7). https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s10489-025-06441-1 Li X, Wen P, Chen P, et al (2024) An effective parallel convolutional anomaly multi-classification model for fault diagnosis in microservice system. Software Qual J 32(3):921–938. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11219-024-09672-6 Li Z, Zhao Y, Han J, et al (2021) Multivariate time series anomaly detection and interpretation using hierarchical inter-metric and temporal embedding. In: Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min. (KDD ’21), pp 3220–3230, https://doi.org/10.1145/3447548.3467075 Li Z, Guo W, An J, et al (2025e) AD2T: Multivariate time-series anomaly detection with association discrepancy dual-decoder transformer. IEEE Sens J 25(7):11710– 11721. https://doi.org/10.1109/jsen.2025.3543835, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ JSEN.2025.3543835 Lian Y, Geng Y, Tian T (2023) Anomaly detection method for multivariate time series data of oil and gas stations based on digital twin and MTAD-GAN. Appl Sci 13(3). https://doi.org/10.3390/app13031891 Liang H, Song L, Wang J, et al (2021) Robust unsupervised anomaly detection via multi-time scale dcgans with forgetting mechanism for industrial multivariate time series. Neurocomputing 423:444–462. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2020.10.084 Liang Q, Yin X (2025) Transformer-based contrastive learning with dynamic masking and adaptive pathways for time series anomaly detection. Expert Syst 42(8). https: 41 //doi.org/10.1111/exsy.70102 Liang S, Guo Y, Chen Y, et al (2025) HiGraph: Learning hierarchical graph for mul-tivariate time series anomaly detection in microservice systems. In: IEEE World Conf. Comput. Commun. Technol. (WCCCT’25), pp 302–308, https://doi.org/10. 1109/wccct65447.2025.11028023 Liang Z, Zhang J, Liang C, et al (2023) A shapelet-based framework for unsupervised multivariate time series representation learning. Proc VLDB Endow 17(3):386–399. https://doi.org/10.14778/3632093.3632103 Lin S, Faust L, D’Mello S, et al (2020) MBead: Semi-supervised multilabel behaviour anomaly detection on multivariate temporal sensory data. In: IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big Data’20), pp 1089–1096, https://doi.org/10.1109/bigdata50022.2020. 9378327 Liu H, Luo W, Han L, et al (2024a) Anomaly detection via graph attention networks-augmented mask autoregressive flow for multivariate time series. IEEE Internet Things J 11(11):19368–19379. https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2024.3362398 Liu W, Zhang W, Jiang Y, et al (2024b) Learning triple-view representation discrep-ancy for multivariate time series anomaly detection with multi-scale patching. In: IEEE Int. Conf. Parallel Distrib. Syst. (ICPADS’24), pp 560–567, https://doi.org/ 10.1109/icpads63350.2024.00079 Liu Y, Wang W, Wu Y (2025) TiTAD: Time-invariant transformer for multivari-ate time series anomaly detection. Electronics 14(7). https://doi.org/10.3390/ electronics14071401 Ma J, Wang H (2024) Anomaly detection in sensor data via encoding time series into images. J King Saud Univ Comput Inf Sci 36(10). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jksuci. 2024.102232 Ma M, Han L, Zhou C (2023) BTAD: A binary transformer deep neural network model for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data. Adv Eng Inform 56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2023.101949 Marwan N, Carmen Romano M, Thiel M, et al (2007) Recurrence plots for the analysis of complex systems. Phys Rep 438(5):237–329. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.physrep.2006.11.001 Matar M, Xia T, Huguenard K, et al (2023) Anomaly detection in coastal wireless sensors via efficient deep sequential learning. IEEE Access 11:110260–110271. https: //doi.org/10.1109/access.2023.3322370 Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, et al (2009) Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: The PRISMA statement. PLOS Med 6(7):1–6. https: 42 //doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000097 Nguyen H, Tran K, Thomassey S, et al (2021) Forecasting and anomaly detection approaches using LSTM and LSTM autoencoder techniques with the applications in supply chain management. Int J Inf Manag 57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt. 2020.102282 van den Oord A, Li Y, Vinyals O (2019) Representation learning with contrastive predictive coding. arXiv:1807.03748 Orabi M, Tran KP, Thomassey S, et al (2024) Anomaly detection for catalyzing operational excellence in complex manufacturing processes: A survey and perspec-tive. In: Artificial Intelligence for Safety and Reliability Engineering: Methods, Applications, and Challenges, Springer Series in Reliability Engineering, pp 49–78, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-71495-5 4 Paparrizos J, Boniol P, Liu Q, et al (2025) Advances in time-series anomaly detection: Algorithms, benchmarks, and evaluation measures. In: Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min. V.2, KDD ’25, p 6151–6161, https://doi.org/10. 1145/3711896.3736565 Park D, Hoshi Y, Kemp CC (2018) A multimodal anomaly detector for robot-assisted feeding using an lstm-based variational autoencoder. IEEE Rob Autom Lett 3(3):1544–1551. https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2018.2801475 Pe˜ na D, Yohai VJ (2023) A review of outlier detection and robust estimation meth-ods for high dimensional time series data. Econom Stat https://doi.org/10.1016/j. ecosta.2023.02.001, (In Press) Pimentel MA, Clifton DA, Clifton L, et al (2014) A review of novelty detection. Signal Process 99:215–249. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sigpro.2013.12.026 Qi S, Chen J, Chen P, et al (2023) An effective dynamic cost-sensitive weighting based anomaly multi-classification model for imbalanced multivariate time series. In: Web Inf. Syst. Eng. (WISE’23), pp 781–790, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-7254-8 60 Qian C, Tang W, Wang Y (2025) RGAnomaly: Data reconstruction-based generative adversarial networks for multivariate time series anomaly detection in the internet of things. Future Gener Comput Syst 167. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2025. 107751 Ramezani SB, Killen B, Cummins L, et al (2021) A survey of hmm-based algorithms in machinery fault prediction. In: IEEE Symp. Ser. Comput. Intell. (SSCI’21), pp 1–9, https://doi.org/10.1109/ssci50451.2021.9659838 43 Schmidl S, Wenig P, Papenbrock T (2022) Anomaly detection in time series: a compre-hensive evaluation. Proc VLDB Endow 15(9):1779–1797. https://doi.org/10.14778/ 3538598.3538602 Schuster M, Paliwal K (1997) Bidirectional recurrent neural networks. IEEE Trans Signal Process 45(11):2673–2681. https://doi.org/10.1109/78.650093 Shen L, Li Z, Kwok JT (2020) Timeseries anomaly detection using tem-poral hierarchical one-class network. In: Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS’20), pp 13016–13026, URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/ hash/97e401a02082021fd24957f852e0e475-Abstract.html Shi X, Chen Z, Wang H, et al (2015) Convolutional LSTM network: a machine learning approach for precipitation nowcasting. In: Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS’15), pp 802–810, URL https://papers.nips.cc/paper files/paper/2015/hash/ 07563a3fe3bbe7e3ba84431ad9d055af-Abstract.html Shu X, Bao T, Zhou Y, et al (2022) Unsupervised dam anomaly detection with spatial–temporal variational autoencoder. Struct Health Monit 22(1):39–55. https: //doi.org/10.1177/14759217211073301 Siffer A, Fouque PA, Termier A, et al (2017) Anomaly detection in streams with extreme value theory. In: Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min. (KDD ’17), pp 1067–1075, https://doi.org/10.1145/3097983.3098144 Song J, Kim K, Oh J, et al (2023a) MEMTO: memory-guided transformer for multivariate time series anomaly detection. In: Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS’23), pp 57947–57963, URL https://papers.nips.cc/paper files/paper/ 2023/hash/b4c898eb1fb556b8d871fbe9ead92256-Abstract-Conference.html Song Y, Xin R, Chen P, et al (2023b) Identifying performance anomalies in fluctu-ating cloud environments: A robust correlative-GNN-based explainable approach. Future Gener Comput Syst 145:77–86. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j. future.2023.03.020 Su P, Lu Z, Chen D (2023) Combining self-organizing map with reinforcement learn-ing for multivariate time series anomaly detection. In: IEEE Int. Conf. Syst. Man Cybern. (SMC’23), pp 1964–1969, https://doi.org/10.1109/smc53992.2023. 10393887 Su Y, Zhao Y, Niu C, et al (2019) Robust anomaly detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural network. In: Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min. (KDD’19), pp 2828–2837, https://doi.org/10.1145/ 3292500.3330672 Sui J, Yu J, Song Y, et al (2024) Anomaly detection for telemetry time series using a denoising diffusion probabilistic model. IEEE Sens J 24(10):16429–16439. https: 44 //doi.org/10.1109/jsen.2024.3383416 Sørbø S, Ruocco M (2023) Navigating the metric maze: a taxonomy of evaluation metrics for anomaly detection in time series. Data Min Knowl Discovery 38(3):1027– 1068. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10618-023-00988-8 Tang C, Xu L, Yang B, et al (2023) GRU-based interpretable multivariate time series anomaly detection in industrial control system. Comput Mater Contin 127. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2023.103094 Terven J, Cordova-Esparza DM, Romero-Gonz´ alez JA, et al (2025) A comprehensive survey of loss functions and metrics in deep learning. Artif Intell Rev 58(7). https: //doi.org/10.1007/s10462-025-11198-7 Tian Z, Zhuo M, Liu L, et al (2023) Anomaly detection using spatial and tempo-ral information in multivariate time series. Sci Rep 13(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41598-023-31193-8 Tu FF, Liu DJ, Yan ZW, et al (2024) STFT-TCAN: A tcn-attention based multivariate time series anomaly detection architecture with time-frequency analysis for cyber-industrial systems. Comput Secur 144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2024.103961 Tuli S, Casale G, Jennings NR (2022) TranAD: deep transformer networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data. Proc VLDB Endow 15(6):1201–1214. https://doi.org/10.14778/3514061.3514067 Usmani UA, Abdul Aziz I, Jaafar J, et al (2024) Deep learning for anomaly detection in time-series data: An analysis of techniques, review of applications, and guidelines for future research. IEEE Access 12:174564–174590. https://doi.org/10.1109/access. 2024.3495819 Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, et al (2017) Attention is all you need. In: Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS’17), pp 6000–6010, URL https://papers.nips.cc/ paper files/paper/2017/hash/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Abstract.html Veliˇ ckovi´ c P, Cucurull G, Casanova A, et al (2018) Graph attention networks. In: Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR’18), URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= rJXMpikCZ Wagner D, Michels T, Schulz FC, et al (2023) TimeseAD: Benchmarking deep multivariate time-series anomaly detection. Trans Mach Learn Res URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=iMmsCI0JsS Wang F, Yan M, Li Q, et al (2023) A multivariate time series anomaly detection model based on spatio-temporal dual features. In: IEEE Int. Conf. Netw. Netw. Appl. (NaNA’23), pp 416–421, https://doi.org/10.1109/NaNA60121.2023.00075 45 Wang F, Jiang Y, Zhang R, et al (2025a) A survey of deep anomaly detection in multivariate time series: Taxonomy, applications, and directions. Sensors 25(1). https://doi.org/10.3390/s25010190 Wang L, Li C (2025) Adjacent neighborhood transformer-based diffusion model for anomaly detection under incomplete industrial data sources. In: Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Min., WSDM ’25, pp 577–585, https://doi.org/10.1145/ 3701551.3703565 Wang L, Lin Y, Wu Y, et al (2021) Forecast-based multi-aspect framework for multi-variate time-series anomaly detection. In: IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big Data’21), pp 938–947, https://doi.org/10.1109/bigdata52589.2021.9671776 Wang L, Zhou Y, Ke W, et al (2025b) Harmful data enhanced anomaly detection for quasi-periodic multivariate time series. Appl Intell 55(7). https://doi.org/10.1007/ s10489-025-06461-x Wang Z, Oates T (2015) Imaging time-series to improve classification and imputation. In: Proc. Int. Jt. Conf. Artif. Intell., IJCAI’15, p 3939–3945, URL https://dl.acm. org/doi/10.5555/2832747.2832798 Wen M, Chen Z, Xiong Y, et al (2025) LGAT: A novel model for multivariate time series anomaly detection with improved anomaly transformer and learning graph structures. Neurocomputing 617. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2024.129024 Wenig P, Schmidl S, Papenbrock T (2022) TimeEval: a benchmarking toolkit for time series anomaly detection algorithms. Proc VLDB Endow 15(12):3678–3681. https://doi.org/10.14778/3554821.3554873 Wu H, Hu T, Liu Y, et al (2023) TimesNet: Temporal 2d-variation modeling for general time series analysis. In: Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR’23), URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=ju Uqw384Oq Wu R, Keogh EJ (2023) Current Time Series Anomaly Detection Benchmarks are Flawed and are Creating the Illusion of Progress . IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng 35(3):2421–2429. https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2021.3112126 Wu YX, Dai BR (2024) STL-ConvTransformer: Series decomposition and convolution-infused transformer architecture in multivariate time series anomaly detection. In: Adv. Knowl. Discov. Data Min. (PAKDD’24), pp 41–52, https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-981-97-2242-6 4 Wu Z, Zhu L, Yin Z, et al (2025) MAFCD: Multi-level and adaptive conditional diffusion model for anomaly detection. Inf Fusion 118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. inffus.2025.102965 46 Xie S, Li L, Zhu Y (2024) Anomaly detection for multivariate time series in iot using discrete wavelet decomposition and dual graph attention networks. Comput Secur 146. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2024.104075 Xie T, Xu Q, Jiang C (2023) Anomaly detection for multivariate times series through the multi-scale convolutional recurrent variational autoencoder. Expert Syst Appl 231. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.120725 Xiong W, Wang P, Sun X, et al (2024) SiET: Spatial information enhanced transformer for multivariate time series anomaly detection. Knowl-Based Syst 296. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.knosys.2024.111928 Xiong Y, Wang J, Xin Y, et al (2023) An attention mechanism based approach for multivariate time series anomaly detection. In: IEEE Int. Conf. Dependable Syst. Their Appl. (DSA’23), pp 173–181, https://doi.org/10.1109/DSA59317.2023.00030 Xu H, Feng Y, Chen J, et al (2018) Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational auto-encoder for seasonal kpis in web applications. In: Proc. ACM World Wide Web Conf. (WWW’18), pp 187–196, https://doi.org/10.1145/3178876.3185996 Xu J, Wu H, Wang J, et al (2022) Anomaly transformer: Time series anomaly detection with association discrepancy. In: Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR’22), https: //doi.org/https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2110.02642 Xu Y, Ding Y, Jiang J, et al (2024) Skip-patching spatial–temporal discrepancy-based anomaly detection on multivariate time series. Neurocomputing 609. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2024.128428 Xu Z, Yang Y, Gao X, et al (2023) DCFF-MTAD: A multivariate time-series anomaly detection model based on dual-channel feature fusion. Sensors 23(8). https://doi. org/10.3390/s23083910 Yan L, Hu H, Yang K, et al (2025) Variational autoencoder based automatic clustering for multivariate time series anomaly detection. In: Wirel. Artif. Intell. Comput. Syst. Appl. (WASA’24), pp 151–162, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-71470-2 13 Yang K, Dou S, Luo P, et al (2022) Robust group anomaly detection for quasi-periodic network time series. IEEE Trans Netw Sci Eng 9(4):2833–2845. https://doi.org/10. 1109/tnse.2022.3170364 Yang Y, Zhang C, Zhou T, et al (2023) DCdetector: Dual attention contrastive rep-resentation learning for time series anomaly detection. In: Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min. (KDD ’23), pp 3033–3045, https://doi.org/10. 1145/3580305.3599295 Yokkampon U, Mowshowitz A, Chumkamon S, et al (2022) Robust unsupervised anomaly detection with variational autoencoder in multivariate time series data. 47 IEEE Access 10:57835–57849. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3178592 Yu J, Song Y, Tang D, et al (2021) Telemetry data-based spacecraft anomaly detection with spatial–temporal generative adversarial networks. IEEE Trans Instrum Meas 70:1–9. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIM.2021.3073442 Yue Z, Wang Y, Duan J, et al (2022) TS2Vec: Towards universal representation of time series. In: Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI’22), pp 8980–8987, https: //doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v36i8.20881 Zamanzadeh Darban Z, Webb GI, Pan S, et al (2024) Deep learning for time series anomaly detection: A survey. ACM Comput Surv 57(1). https://doi.org/10.1145/ 3691338 Zhan J, Wang S, Ma X, et al (2022) STGAT-MAD: Spatial-temporal graph atten-tion network for multivariate time series anomaly detection. In: IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP’22), pp 3568–3572, https://doi.org/10. 1109/ICASSP43922.2022.9747274 Zhang A, Chen P, Gu Y, et al (2025a) Dynamic graph contrastive learning for mul-tivariate time series anomaly detection. J Supercomput 81(8). https://doi.org/10. 1007/s11227-025-07455-9 Zhang C, Song D, Chen Y, et al (2019) A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data. In: Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI’19), pp 1409–1416, https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v33i01. 33011409 Zhang C, Zhou T, Wen Q, et al (2022a) TFAD: A decomposition time series anomaly detection architecture with time-frequency analysis. In: Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manag. (CIKM’22), pp 2497–2507, https://doi.org/10.1145/3511808. 3557470 Zhang J, Wang C, Zhang X, et al (2022b) Multi-attention integrated convolutional network for anomaly detection of time series. In: IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Autom. Eng. (ICCAE’22), pp 91–96, https://doi.org/10.1109/iccae55086.2022.9762449 Zhang X, Wang C, Zhang J, et al (2022c) Attention based cnn-lstm network for anomaly pattern classification of multivariate time series. In: IEEE Data Driven Control Learn. Syst. Conf. (DDCLS’22), pp 1015–1020, https://doi.org/10.1109/ ddcls55054.2022.9858500 Zhang X, Zhang J, Wang C, et al (2022d) CANet: Convolutional attention-based network for multivariate time series anomaly detection. In: IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Comput. Signal Process. (ICSP’22), pp 1625–1630, https://doi.org/10.1109/ icsp54964.2022.9778305 48 Zhang X, Wang G, Chen Y, et al (2025b) Inter-layer explainable variational autoen-coder model for multivariate time series anomaly detection. Eng Appl Artif Intell 159. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2025.111585 Zhang Y, Chen Y, Wang J, et al (2023a) Unsupervised deep anomaly detection for multi-sensor time-series signals. IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng 35(2):2118–2132. https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2021.3102110 Zhang Y, Wang J, Chen Y, et al (2023b) Adaptive memory networks with self-supervised learning for unsupervised anomaly detection. IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng 35(12):12068–12080. https://doi.org/10.1109/tkde.2021.3139916 Zhao H, Wang Y, Duan J, et al (2020) Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph attention network. In: IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min. (ICDM’20), pp 841–850, https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDM50108.2020.00093 Zhao P, Chang X, Wang M (2021) A novel multivariate time-series anomaly detection approach using an unsupervised deep neural network. IEEE Access 9:109025– 109041. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2021.3101844 Zheng J, Duan J, Zhang K, et al (2024a) Multi-scale deep convolutional time series anomaly detection based on correlation matrix. In: IEEE Int. Symp. Comput. Inf. Process. Technol. (ISCIPT’24), pp 613–617, https://doi.org/10.1109/iscipt61983. 2024.10672758 Zheng Y, Koh HY, Jin M, et al (2024b) Graph spatiotemporal process for multivariate time series anomaly detection with missing values. Inf Fusion 106. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.inffus.2024.102255 Zhou B, Liu S, Hooi B, et al (2019) BeatGAN: anomalous rhythm detection using adversarially generated time series. In: Proc. Int. Jt. Conf. Artif. Intell., IJCAI’19, pp 4433–4439, https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2019/616 Zhou H, Yu K, Zhang X, et al (2022a) Contrastive autoencoder for anomaly detection in multivariate time series. Inf Sci 610:266–280. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2022. 07.179 Zhou L, Zeng Q, Li B (2022b) Hybrid anomaly detection via multihead dynamic graph attention networks for multivariate time series. IEEE Access 10:40967–40978. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3167640 Zhou Q, Chen J, Liu H, et al (2023a) Detecting multivariate time series anomalies with zero known label. In: Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI’23), pp 4963–4971, https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v37i4.25623 Zhou X, Wang Y, Xu H, et al (2023b) Local-adaptive transformer for multivariate time series anomaly detection and diagnosis. In: IEEE Int. Conf. Syst. Man Cybern. 49 (SMC’23), pp 89–95, https://doi.org/10.1109/SMC53992.2023.10394229 Zhu H, Xiao N, Ling H, et al (2025) TSAD: Temporal–spatial association differences-based unsupervised anomaly detection for multivariate time-series. Neurocomputing 648. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2025.130611 Zong B, Song Q, Min MR, et al (2018) Deep autoencoding gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection. In: Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR’18), URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=BJJLHbb0-50