Title: Transformer autoencoder with local attention for sparse and irregular time series with application on risk estimation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.08914v1

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 00:53:58 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# Transformer autoencoder with local attention for sparse and irregular time series with application on risk estimation 

# Panteleimon Rodis 

Abstract 

This paper introduces a framework specifically designed for sparse and irregular time series risk estimation. It is based on a Transformer Autoencoder with local attention, which leverages the powerful pattern identification capabilities of trans-formers complemented by traditional data cleaning and normalization methods. It efficiently captures relevant patterns within irregular sequences suffering from sparse data collection, benefiting from the discriminative ability of the local atten-tion mechanism. The proposed framework is applied to a real-world case study, on the risk estimation of non-technical losses in electrical power systems in a wide area in Greece. Non-technical losses in electrical power systems, primarily stem-ming from electricity theft, pose significant economic and operational challenges. Detecting these anomalies is particularly challenging due to the inherent sparse and irregular nature of real-world data collection practices. Traditional risk estimation methods struggle with effectively capturing long-range dependencies and robustly handling such data characteristics. We demonstrate that our approach effectively yields highly discriminative latent features, which results in more consistent risk estimation compared with existing state-of-the-art and widely used methods. It achieves high recall and precision, meeting the critical objectives of the problem. As such, our solution offers a robust and effective tool for risk detection in irregular time series datasets. 

Keywords: Transformer Autoencoder, Local Attention, Irregular Time Series, Risk Estimation, Power Systems 

# 1 Introduction 

Traditional approaches to time series classification and anomaly detection in time series data, often exhibit limitations when confronted with sparse and irregular data [1]. Machine Learning (ML) methods typically require regularly sampled and dense datasets [2], and thus struggle to capture long-range temporal dependencies and handle missing or unevenly spaced observations. The emergence of deep learning architectures has shown significant promise in processing sequential data due to their ability to model complex dependencies regardless of their position in the sequence, especially when it comes to transformers [3, 4]. However, directly applying standard transformer models to sparse and irregular time series is still a challenge. In this work we address these limitations by introducing a framework specifically designed for sparse and irregular time series classification. Our proposed approach 

# rodis@uom.edu.gr, 

University of Macedonia, Greece May 2026 

1

> arXiv:2605.08914v1 [cs.LG] 9 May 2026

leverages a transformer autoencoder augmented with a local attention mechanism. This architecture is carefully crafted to exploit the powerful pattern identification capabilities of transformers while simultaneously integrating traditional data cleaning and normalization techniques to enhance data quality. The transformer’s attention mechanism is an active field of research, primarily focusing on reducing its computational complexity [5] and enabling a more refined and effective investigation of relationships among input data elements [6, 7]. In this context, we investigate its use in handling irregular time series. To demonstrate the efficacy of our framework, we apply it to a real-world case study regarding the risk estimation of non-technical losses in electrical power systems across a wide area of Greece. The identification of these losses represents a critical challenge for power utilities worldwide, as they result in substantial economic drains and operational inefficiencies [8]. Furthermore, this issue is particularly pronounced in Greece, posing a major concern for local power systems [9], where ML approaches have been explored in the past to address this problem [10]. The intricate nature of identifying non-technical losses is further complicated by the inherent sparse and irregular characteristics of the available data. Through extensive experimentation, we showcase that our method effectively extracts highly discriminative latent features, leading to effective classification of suspicious cases. The core contribution of this work is a framework designed to effectively han-dle irregular and sparse time series. This framework uniquely combines classical data cleaning and normalization methods with a state-of-the-art transformer autoencoder architecture, offering several key features: 

• It circumvents the need for interpolation of missing data by efficiently recognizing patterns within existing sparse data. 

• It implements a two-step normalization procedure specifically engineered to address the challenges of data sparsity and heterogeneity. 

• Effectively leverages local attention within the transformer autoencoder architecture for handling sparse time series and exhibits its advantages; a topic with limited references in literature. 

• Demonstrates a robust ability to perform classification, achieving strong results detached from the need for labeled data. Furthermore, we investigate the conditions under which training on a subset of the available dataset is sufficient to classify the entire set. The application of the framework on the risk analysis of non-technical losses, contributes a novel methodology designed to overcome inherent limitations often encountered during data collection in these systems. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we present the architecture, the functionality and the training procedure of the transformer autoen-coder encompassed in our framework. In section 3, we discuss how we handle sparsity and irregularity issues within the time series dataset. Subsequently, in section 4, we present our solution on risk estimation on non-technical losses in electrical power sys-tems using our framework. In section 5, we evaluate the performance and efficiency of the framework on the case study by comparing it with other state-of-the-art and popular methods. Related works and our conclusions are discussed in sections 6 and 7 respectively. 22 Transformer Autoencoders for Time Series Classification 

## 2.1 Architecture 

Transformer autoencoder is a neural network (NN) architecture comprising three key components an encoder , a decoder and an intermediate latent space , i.e a hidden vector [11]. An overview of the architecture we use in this work, is presented in fig. 1.  

> Fig. 1 Transformer autoencoder.

The core concept behind its operation is the ability to learn efficiently low-dimensional representations of input data. Specifically, the encoder maps the high-dimensional input sequences dataset X to lower-dimensional representations Y within the latent space and generates a representation model for the whole dataset of sequences. As such the encoder defines function Y = enc (X). Subsequently, the decoder attempts to reconstruct the sequences solely from their latent space representations Y defined in function X′ = dec (Y ). The magnitude of the reconstruction errors, computed as the Mean Square Error 

M SE (X, X ′) = 1/|X| ∥ X −′ X∥2, indicates the extent of similarity among the sequences. High reconstruction errors typically suggest that input sequences deviate significantly from the patterns learned by the autoencoder during training and indicate potential anomalies or structural differences, while low reconstruction errors typically indicate common patterns among the sequences. We denote as RE A(X, N ) the average reconstruction error of set N when fed into autoencoder A trained on dataset X.In particular, the transformer encoder architecture in our framework takes as input a time series dataset. The encoder consists of a sequence of local attention transformer encoder blocks. Each block, the structure of which is sketched in fig. 2, encompasses a Multi-Head Self-Attention mechanism [12] which performs several independent self-attention calculations in parallel. The self-attention mechanism in transformers calculates attention scores between every pair of elements in a sequence, as such allows the model to weigh the importance of different parts of an input sequence. It was introduced in [13] and is described as follows Attention( Q, K, V ) = softmax 

 QK T

√dk



V

• Q: query matrix 

• K: key matrix 

• V : value matrix 

• dk: dimension of the key vectors 3The attention function is computed in a set of queries stored in matrix Q and on the keys and values found into matrices K, V . This design can be computationally expensive and in many time series applications this can be ineffective as the most significant dependencies or anomalous patterns might occur within a localized temporal context.  

> Fig. 2 Typical transformer encoder block.

Local attention addresses these challenges by restricting the attention computa-tion to a predefined local attention window around each element [14]. This reduces the computational complexity and guides the model to primarily focus on immediate tem-poral neighbors, which is often beneficial for learning fine-grained patterns and changes within time series data. This might look similar to the sliding window technique [15], the difference is that local attention aims to apply the attention mechanism on parts of the time series, while the sliding window splits the training sequence into smaller segments to feed them into autoencoder. Essentially, during local attention an element still generates its query vector qi from the query matrix Q. However, it only attends to key-value pairs ( kj , v j ) where index j

falls within the local window of size w around element i. This is typically implemented by applying a mask to the attention scores QK T such that values outside the window are ignored during the softmax operation. The masking procedure handles the time series edges by adjusting the window size for elements near the boundaries. For any element i of time series x, the window’s span is computed so as not to exceed the time series length. The start index of the window is set to max(0 , i − ⌊ w/ 2⌋) while the end of the window is set to min( |x|, i + ⌊w/ 2⌋ + 1). This approach ensures that elements at the boundaries fall within a smaller but valid attention window. The resulting mask is then passed to the multi-head attention layer within the transformer encoder block. The attention mechanism uses this mask to zero out the attention scores for any elements outside the local window, effectively preventing them from influencing the output during the softmax operation. This ensures that the model focuses exclusively on immediate temporal neighbors. The outcome of the final transformer encoder block is passed to a Global Average Pooling layer applied across the sequential dimension. The resulting pooled vector is then passed to a final Dense layer to project it into the n-dimensional vector of the latent space. This vector serves as the compressed, meaningful representation of the input time series window in n dimensions. Subsequently, the decoder strives to reconstruct the original input time series from their latent space representation. A typical decoder is sketched in fig. 3. The decoder 4first passes the latent representation through a dense layer and a reshape operation to match the required time series sequence shape. Then the reshaped representations are fed to a sequence of Transformer Decoder Blocks. Each block incorporates a Causal Self-Attention mechanism, followed by a Feed-Forward Network. Commonly but not always necessary, layer normalizations are applied throughout the block to ensure stable training. A final dense layer projects the output back to the original feature dimension to produce the reconstructed time series.  

> Fig. 3 Typical transformer decoder block.

## 2.2 Training and Inference 

As a neural network architecture, autoencoders are trained on a dataset Ds and then they can be used for inference on dataset Dw which may be identical to Ds or a distinct evaluation set. The training objective is to minimize the reconstruction error which is commonly defined as the Mean Square Error between the original and the reconstructed samples. During inference, the autoencoder produces the latent space representation, the reconstructed sample and the associated reconstruction error calculation. In this work we focus on cases where Ds ⊆ Dw and we aim to perform unsupervised clustering of a large dataset by training an autoencoder on a subset of it. The goal is to identify and group time series in Dw exploiting their structural similarities with the time series in Ds, revealed in the learned latent space. As such, a cluster containing low reconstruction errors of the original training samples is expected during inference to contain samples of low reconstruction errors from Dw. The latent space gener-ated from Ds will exhibit approximately the same discriminative power and intrinsic dimensionality as a latent space generated from training the autoencoder on Dw.The training results can be used for clustering by examining two primary characteristics of the autoencoder: 

• The quality of the latent representation. In this design, clustering methods like the K-Means algorithm can be applied to cluster the dataset Dw samples into similarity groups based on their generated latent space representations. 

• The reconstruction error, which can be used for grouping elements of Dw by their projection distance from the data manifold learned by the autoencoder. Outliers and anomalies will yield a high reconstruction error, while samples structurally similar to the majority of samples in Ds will yield low reconstruction errors. This allows for a threshold-based classification for the samples in Dw.We can use Ds ⊂ Dw for training with the same results as using Dw provided that 

Ds is representative of the entire dataset. Let us define the notion of representative subset: 5Definition 1 (Representative Subset) . For autoencoder A and sets Dw and 

Ds ⊂ Dw. Set Ds is representative of Dw if for acceptable threshold t, it holds that 

RE A(Dw, D w) − RE A(Ds, D w) < t .The value of threshold t is always case-dependent and relevant to the objectives of each problem. Therefore, it is necessary to determine whether training the autoencoder with sets Dw and Ds produces acceptable and similar results and subsequently assess the value of t as acceptable. Conversely, if the training set lacks representativeness, e.g. Dw contains time series that do not exhibit similarities with elements of Ds, the two learning paradigms will produce divergent results. 

## 2.3 Clustering and evaluation 

In this work we consider reconstruction error-based clustering, which provides a straightforward method for grouping samples into groups of normal, low error, samples and groups of high error outliers. It is always a problem-dependent case to determine which category we are most interested in. During inference, reconstruction errors are recorded for all time series in Dw. The dataset is typically sorted in ascending order if we care for normal time series and in descending when we care for outliers. Then we either form clusters of fixed size and split the sorted dataset in them or we use threshold criterion c to assign each time series to a cluster comparing reconstruction errors with c. A challenging issue is determining the optimal cluster’s fixed size or the value of c, as it requires foreseeing the distribution of common features in the time series dataset. This is a problem-dependent feature and as such there is not a standard procedure to determine it. To evaluate the clustering outcome we may use labeled samples in Dw and examine their distribution in the generated clusters. In this design, labeled data are only used for evaluation and do not alter the unsupervised nature of the training procedure. The most successful clustering, manages to place (most of) the labeled data in the same cluster and maintains the size of the cluster in some acceptable range. As such, we choose cluster Ck of size within acceptable range which maximizes recall and precision as defined next. 

• Recall or True Positive Rate . For cluster Ck we compute 

Recall = T P 

(T P + F N )where True Positive ( T P ) are the labeled data within Ck and False Negative ( F N )are the labeled time series not classified in this cluster. This metric assesses how comprehensively Ck captures the members of a known labeled set. 

• Precision. Quantifies the purity of a cluster with respect to the known positive class. 

P recision = T P 

|Ck|

Note that in case of a small labeled subset within a large cluster Ck, the precision is expected to be numerically small. In the context of risk estimation, and given that Dw encompasses a number of positive labeled samples, the cluster containing the largest number of positive samples includes time series of similar structure to these positive samples, as such it forms the 6higher-risk class. Conversely, clusters with fewer positive samples indicate lower-risk classes. 

# 3 Irregularity and Normalization 

The method presented in this study primarily addresses the challenging issue of detect-ing patterns in time series which exhibit sampling sparsity and irregularity in data collection. Sparsity occurs when the average sampling rate is too low for traditional pattern recognition methods to be effective. Irregularity can arise when data for the same features are gathered from diverse, heterogeneous sources with differing specifications and varied scaling. For instance, in the case study presented in section 4, power consumption measurements were collected by humans and two distinct types of telemeters. Each source follows unique procedures and operates within varying time intervals. Additionally, these measurements represent accounts from diverse consumption profiles e.g. houses, factories, public institutions and cause variation in the scaling of the recorded data. Crucially, sparsity combined with variations in sampling rate creates time series where relationships between features are loose. These characteristics impose the use of unsupervised learning rather than depending on the sparse labeled data for some super-vised alternative. Furthermore, the inherent diverse scaling necessitates pre-processing of the raw data and normalization before training so as to ensure that the autoen-coder learns structural patterns rather than features tied to specific collection sources or magnitude. The following two subsections describe how we handle normalization issues within our framework. 

## 3.1 Two-Step Normalization 

In the time series dataset we apply a two-step normalization procedure, first a row-wise normalization and then the application of MinMax Scaler. 

Row-wise normalization . This initial step transforms absolute values within each data sample, i.e. time series, into relative proportions. The normalized value x′

> i,j

on place j of time series xi of z time steps is computed as follows 

x′ 

> i,j

= xi,j 

P xi,z 

This step is utilized because the distribution of values within each time series is of greater interest than their absolute magnitudes and enables the model to identify pat-tern variations, rather than solely anomalies based on merely extreme absolute values. This prevents the autoencoder from learning to reconstruct high-magnitude samples at the expense of those with lower magnitudes. The outcome of this normalization step highlights the proportional relationships of the values within each time series. In our case study, given that the dataset represents varying consumption sums across different accounts, row-wise normalization effectively equalize these disparities. 

MinMax Scaler . It is a scaling technique which transforms the range of inde-pendent variables to a specified interval, in our case [0,1]. This process ensures that all features are on a uniform scale, which is crucial for algorithms sensitive to input magnitudes, such as neural networks, and is computed as follows 

x′ 

> i,j

= xi,j − xmin( j)

xmax( j) − xmin( j)

7where x′ 

> i,j

is the normalized value of the element in the i-th row and j-th column, 

xmin( j) and xmax( j) represent the minimum and maximum values of the j-th column across the dataset. Even after applying row-wise normalization the individual values within each time series can still vary significantly across the entire dataset. MinMaxS-caler will scale these proportions globally across all rows and columns to the desired range ensuring all input features to the autoencoder are within a consistent range, which is vital for the stable training and optimal performance of autoencoders and neural networks in general. 

## 3.2 Normalization Layers 

The typical design of a transformer autoencoder encompasses normalizations layers as sketched in fig. 2 and 3. They are utilized to normalize the feature vector within a single sample and across all feature dimensions so as to ensures that the inputs to the subsequent dense layer, or the next transformer block, has a consistent scale and mean. The application of the two-step normalization process in certain cases may ren-der the use of normalization layers within the autoencoder architecture redundant. Furthermore, over-normalization may have a negative effect on the classification procedure. Consequently, the effect of the normalization layers in the learning process has to be evaluated. In cases like the study presented in section 4, these layers have to be omitted. This behavior is further explained by the following considerations. Row-wise normalization already standardizes the magnitude of each sample, ensur-ing that all time series lie within a compact and comparable numerical range. Applying additional per-sample normalization removes meaningful amplitude information and alters the relative feature relationships within each time series. The MinMax Scaler is performed before the data are fed to the model, scaling the features. The use of normalization layers within the transformer blocks further contributed to the over-normalization of the dataset affecting training and inference. Given these considerations, the removal of normalization layers must be examined from both the encoder and the decoder blocks. This modification, when it is necessary to be applied, yields faster convergence and improves reconstruction fidelity. 

# 4 Case Study: Risk Estimation for Non-Technical Losses in Electrical Power Systems in Greece 

Non-technical losses in Greece constituted up to 4.5% of total power consumption between 2019 and 2023 [16]. In this context, our method is applied to risk estimation primarily focusing on the classification and identification of accounts suspected of exhibiting non-technical losses. We use the dataset provided by Hellenic Electricity Distribution Network Operator S.A. (HEDNO) during the 2023 Datathon [17]. This dataset was chosen for its unique combination of characteristics, which pro-vide a significant pattern recognition challenge that sets it apart from other available datasets. It is a large-scale dataset characterized by substantial heterogeneity, data sparsity and irregular sampling due to inconsistent data collection practices. Addition-ally, the data records show scalar variations stemming from diverse power consumption profiles. These characteristics make the dataset an ideal case study for developing robust methods for pattern identification and risk estimation. Our review of related works shows that most research on non-technical losses relies on small to medium sized datasets with frequent sampling, which do not address the diverse inconsistencies found in this dataset and the challenges associated with them. 8The datasets used in literature can be effectively analyzed using less sophisticated methods than the one proposed in this work. 

## 4.1 Dataset Description 

The dataset contains real-world data collected from a broad geographical area across Greece including information on electricity supply companies, consumption measure-ments, declared consumption types per account and other additional information. In our analysis, we hold the assumption that accounts with non-technical losses exhibit common patterns in their power consumption. Fig. 6 presents indicative examples of normalized average monthly consumption diagrams for accounts with verified non-technical losses and accounts not found to participate in losses from the given dataset. These examples demonstrate that non-technical losses accounts show consumption fluctuations, while accounts without losses maintain a smoother consumption profile and this observation is also found in other studies like in [18]. Fluctuations arise from interventions in the power system which lead to anomalies in consumption profiles. Therefore we utilize the transformer autoencoder for anomaly detection, specifically seeking for outliers. Our analysis focuses on account-level consumption rather than household-level consumption, as residents changes in a house can introduce consumption variability and fluctuations independent of non-technical losses. Based on these, we restrict our analysis to the dataset of consumption measure-ments; provided in kilowatt-hours. This dataset includes anonymized data of 1,234,509 consumer accounts and 9,201,395 consumption measurements located in an urban area in Greece collected from early 2018 to late 2022. Non-technical losses were verified for 2,316 of the accounts. The absence of explicit negative labels in the dataset, i.e. 

accounts confirmed not to exhibit non-technical losses, is a reasonable and inherent characteristic of this problem domain which favors the application of unsupervised methodologies. The dataset exhibits significant heterogeneity and data sparsity across several dimensions: 

• Data collection methodologies vary, comprising manual readings by employees of HEDNO and inputs from two distinct types of telemeters one for medium voltage and another for low voltage supplies. 

• Temporal heterogeneity in consumption periods. The accounts exhibit diverse peri-ods of activation and overall consumption durations. Consequently, this dataset generates time series of variable lengths, a large portion of which are too short to be useful in a risk estimation model. 

• The dataset includes disparate energy consumption profiles as it comprises indus-trial load profiles, consumption data from small and medium-sized enterprises and residential consumption profiles which constitute the majority of the profiles. 

• The consumption data demonstrate sparsity due to their irregular measurement intervals; regardless of their consumption profile. For most accounts consumption data are recorded quarterly while a subset is measured monthly and some accounts feature arbitrary measurement periods. This inherent heterogeneity, a sample of which is illustrated in fig. 4, mandates the transformation of the dataset into a more suitable form and the removal of invalid or noisy data. The consumption measurements have a temporal dimension and the most obvious choice is to form time series in a normalized form as described next. 9Fig. 4 Consumption measurements.   

> Fig. 5 Average monthly consumptions before normalization.
> Fig. 6 Indicative examples of average monthly consumption diagrams, after applying row-wise normalization, of accounts with and without verified non-technical losses.

## 4.2 Pre-Processing and Cleaning 

Pre-processing transforms the given dataset into a set of time series. During the clean-ing procedure we remove invalid values and time series that are empty or too short to be useful in our analysis. The sequence of procedures is executed as follows: 1. The given dataset is transformed into a matrix, where each row corresponds to an individual account and each column represents a specific month within the time interval spanning the years 2018 to 2022. The matrix elements denote the mea-sured consumption for the respective account in the corresponding month. Missing measurements in a given month are represented by negative values. During this 10 transformation, invalid outlier values such as arbitrarily large readings were removed from the dataset. 2. Subsequently, labeling was applied in 2,316 accounts for which non-technical losses were confirmed. 3. The dataset is further transformed into a set of arrays which form the time series. In every row of the matrix, for every time interval defined between two consecutive measurements we compute the average monthly consumption as the fraction of the latest measurement divided by the number of months in the interval and place the quotient into the corresponding array. The heterogeneity of the data implies that the generated time series vary in scale; a few examples are illustrated in fig. 5. 4. Subsequently we apply the row-wise normalization, as discussed in detail in section 3.1, which addresses the scaling variation problem. Indicative examples of some resulted time series are illustrated in fig. 6. 5. Further cleaning is necessary as time series of zero values introduce noise to the dataset and time series of length less than seven time steps cannot be efficiently exploited, they are too short to represent delinquent patterns as we concluded through extensive experimentation, therefore they are removed. 6. To ensure consistent model analysis and considering the variable lengths of our time series, all time series are pruned and zero-padded to a uniform length of 58 time steps. 7. Before feeding the time series to the autoencoder we apply the MinMax Scaler normalization procedure, also described in section 3.1. The produced dataset consists of 347,546 time series each of 58 time steps in normal-ized form and 891 of them are labeled as participating in non-technical losses activities. Each time series constitutes of a sequence of average monthly consumptions, one per measurement period. Based on our assumption and for an account that experiences non-technical losses, its behavior as reflected on its power consumption measurements will change and we will detect this by studying the pattern of the average monthly consumptions among the measurement periods. 

## 4.3 Risk estimation 

Following inference, time series are sorted in descending order by reconstruction error to facilitate outlier detection. Time series of higher reconstruction errors are designated as outliers that exhibit higher risk of participating in power theft. Then we employ the strategy of dividing the time series in clusters of fixed size, where the cluster’s size is set equal 15% of Dw; the final cluster consists approximately of 10% of the total. Consequently, time series classified into the first cluster exhibit the highest risk, the estimated risk is decreasing in each subsequent cluster. The operation of the autoencoder is unsupervised. Labeled data are not used during training but they are used for the evaluation of the training results. In this spirit, the cluster size is chosen to harmonize the requirement for a sufficiently large percentage of labeled positive samples in the outlier cluster which will indicate high risk, with the goal of forming clusters with a number of samples that could be practically utilized, 

i.e. subsequent manual investigation. Our benchmarks showed that the proposed autoencoder training on either the full dataset Dw or on a representative subset Ds yields similar results; this is extensively analyzed in section 5. As such we can avoid the computationally demanding training on Dw by utilizing a smaller training dataset of 100,000 randomly chosen time series of Dw. Furthermore, we excluded the labeled time series from all autoencoder training 11 configurations to avoid potential label bias and any dependency on labeled data during training. 

# 5 Evaluation 

For the evaluation of our proposed method, we utilize comparison with other popu-lar and state-of-the-art methods and with alternative configurations. The comparison is based on two pillars. Following inference, firstly we study the distribution of the positive labeled data in the formatted clusters, quantifying the model’s utility for risk estimation. The comparison is conducted in terms of Recall and Precision for the high-risk cluster of each configuration. Secondly, we compare the robustness of each configuration evaluating the consistency of the produced clustering across the clusters of all different methods and configurations. 

## 5.1 Comparison Methods 

The proposed transformer autoencoder (TR-LA) encompasses the following features 

• 4 transformer encoder blocks and 4 decoder blocks. 

• Dimension of the Feed Forward NN in each transformer’s block is set to 16. 

• Every multi-head attention mechanism encompasses 5 heads, each with a dimension of 5. 

• Latent space dimension is set to 10. 

• Local attention window is set to 5. TR-LA is compared against the following methods, all implemented using standard functionalities within the TensorFlow and Keras libraries. The hyperparameters were determined through extensive experimentation. 

• Transformer autoencoder with full self-attention mechanism (TR-FU); local atten-tion window is set equal to time series size. This comparison exhibits the advantages in local pattern recognition of the local attention mechanism. 

• Convolutional 1D autoencoder (CONV), a standard state-of-the-art approach in this domain [19]. Its architecture is sketched in fig. 7 and consists of the following components: – The encoder is composed of three convolutional layers with 64, 32 and 10 filters, respectively. – The decoder mirrors this structure in reverse, consisting of three layers with 10, 32 and 64 filters. – The kernel size is set to 3 for all layers. 

• Standard Feed Forward Deep Neural Network (FF-NN) employed for binary clas-sification, which is a classical and popular approach [18]. The model consists of: – An input layer with a size equal to the time series size. – Two hidden layers, each with 64 nodes utilizing the hyperbolic tangent (tanh) activation function. – A single-node output layer with a sigmoid activation function to produce the final classification. The NN model is trained on a fixed size dataset of size ten times the total labeled data; where verified losses are labeled as 1 and the remaining data labeled as 0. The FF-NN outputs a prediction of the probability of each time series to belong to the 12 positive class. The resulting time series are sorted based on this predicted proba-bility and then divided into clusters. For the evaluation of the model we employed three training configurations: FF-NN-05, FF-NN-08 and FF-NN-10 which encom-pass respectively 50%, 80% and 100% of the labeled samples in their training sets. The models in all configurations were trained for 80 epochs.  

> Fig. 7 Convolutional Autoencoder.

Given the unsupervised nature of the autoencoders, it is necessary to investigate the effect of different dataset sizes in training. Therefore, we employed three training dataset configurations utilizing different subsets of the available training dataset, dis-tinguished by different suffices on the models’ notations. In this context, it is found that each configuration requires a varying number of epochs to achieve optimal train-ing and prevent under- or overfitting, presented in table 1, and this holds both for the transformer and the convolutional autoencoders. Note that notation -346K indi-cates models trained on the entire available dataset, excluding the labeled samples. The batch size for all autoencoder models is set equal to 10,000.          

> Table 1 Training sizes and epochs for autoencoder training Notation Suffix Epochs Training Set Size -346K 20 346,567 -100K 30 100,000 -10K 80 10,000

## 5.2 Evaluation Results 

The following figures 8, 9, 10 and 11 illustrate the distribution of positive labeled samples in the formatted clusters of models TR-LA-100K, TR-FU-100K, CONV-100K and FF-NN-10, respectively. These are the most efficient training dataset configurations based on our benchmarks. The choice to use -100K subset for training is supported by the average recon-struction errors shown in Table 2 and our experimental results. As defined in Definition 1, -100K serves as a representative subset for the transformer autoencoders as it yields similar reconstruction error with training in the entire dataset. Based on our benchmarks, CONV also yields similar results when trained in -100K and -346K. 13 Fig. 8 Transformer autoencoder with local attention (TR-LA-100K). Fig. 9 Transformer autoencoder with full self-attention (TR-FU-100K).                

> Fig. 10 Convolutional autoencoder (CONV-100K). Fig. 11 Feed Forward Neural Network (FF-NN-10).
> Table 2 Average reconstruction errors -346K -100K -10K TR-LA 0.000575 0.000581 0.000585 TR-FU 0.000525 0.000518 0.000616 CONV 0.000246 0.001072 0.002074

All models manage to allocate a large proportion, approximately 50% of the labeled data, in the high-risk cluster and initially appear to approach their quantitative target. This result shows that the data pre-processing and data cleaning strategy is effective in exposing patterns detectable by all models. As indicated by the recall and precision metrics of the high-risk cluster, on table 3, the CONV-100K autoencoder lags slightly in efficiency, while FF-NN-10 slightly outperforms the rest. Note that due to the limited number of labeled samples, highest possible value for precision is 0.01709. However, a further analysis of the supervised training requirements in FF-NN and the consistency of the results for the autoencoders reveals significant qualitative differences in the produced results, as shown next. 

## 5.3 Robustness and Efficiency 

The supervised nature of the FF-NN architecture exhibits a vulnerability to the selec-tion of different training datasets. Given the irregular data collection methods, this vulnerability can have a significant impact on the produced results. This concern is out-lined in the recall metrics of all FF-NN configurations, shown in Table 4, and is more concretely illustrated in the subsequent consistency evaluation of all models, table 5. 14 Table 3 High risk cluster recall and precision TR-LA-100K TR-FU-100K CONV-100K FF-NN-10 Recall 0.5050 0.5050 0.4769 0.5061 Precision 0.00863 0.00863 0.00815 0.00865 

Fewer labeled samples in the training set degrade the recall of the high-risk cluster, furthermore the clustering procedure exhibits inconsistency.      

> Table 4 Recall for FF-NN training configurations FF-NN-05 FF-NN-08 FF-NN-10 0,4702 0,4713 0,5061

The robustness of each architecture is measured in terms of clustering consistency across the different training configurations. In this respect, we measure the percent-age of samples classified by each method in the same cluster across the different training dataset configurations, i.e. -346K, -100K and -10K. A method that consis-tently assigns the same samples on the same clusters using different configurations of training datasets, exhibits robustness and successfully mitigates challenges posed by irregularities in data collection and time-series formation. Table 5 presents the percentage metrics. The transformer autoencoders are more consistent, exhibiting a high percentage of consistent sample assignment to the high-risk cluster and average high consistency across all clusters, which signifies the qualitative advantages of their clustering outputs against the other methods. Specifi-cally, TR-LA shows greater consistency than the TR-FU, highlighting the advantages of local attention and the improved discriminative abilities it provides. Conversely, FF-NN and CONV fail to provide reliable classifications as they exhibit vulnerability to variations in the training dataset formation.                                      

> Table 5 Percentage of clustering similarity (%) Cluster TR-LA TR-FU CONV FF-NN #1 98.18 93.52 72.24 48.14 #2 95.28 82.43 37.08 23.14 #3 92.38 73.69 24.46 16.78 #4 89.00 64.38 19.67 19.02 #5 86.48 58.24 19.83 20.43 #6 86.48 60.48 24.63 32.66 #7 90.64 73.34 13.96 53.29 Average: 91.21 72.30 30.27 30.50

For the evaluation we used an NVIDIA Tesla T4 GPU equipped with 16 GB of memory and 15 GB of system RAM. Training on the entire dataset required approxi-mately 5 minutes for the transformer autoencoders, 1 minute for CONV and 30 seconds for FF-NN. When run on a conventional desktop PC, equipped with an 8-core CPU 15 and 8 GB of RAM, the runtime for TR-LA-346K was 2 hours, while for TR-FU-346K required 6 hours. Training the models with -100K instead of -346K, reduces runtime nearly by half for all models. These metrics highlight the computational overhead asso-ciated with transformer autoencoders and the efficiency provided by the local attention mechanism over full attention. The experimental evaluation concluded in favor of the use of transformer autoencoder with local attention, demonstrating consistent classification results and reasonable computational overhead. 

# 6 Related Works 

In this section we review related works in irregular time series classification and risk estimation of non-technical losses encompassing deep learning methods. 

## 6.1 Irregular Time Series Classification 

The works reviewed in this section illustrate the evolving trends in applying deep learning and particularly autoencoders and attention mechanisms to handle sparse and irregular time series. A variational autoencoder-based model specifically designed for irregularly sampled time series is proposed in [20]. The autoencoder explicitly models the probability of observation times using Poisson processes, allowing it to handle arbitrary time gaps effectively. In [21] the use of a variational autoencoder for irregular time series is also explored. It employs a masked input form to replace missing entries with zeros. While applied to images in their work, the underlying principle is relevant to handling missing data in time series. A novel deep learning architecture is introduced in [22] for supervised learning with sparse and irregularly sampled multivariate time series. This architecture leverages a semi-parametric interpolation network to facilitate information sharing across multiple dimensions during the interpolation stage, followed by a flexible prediction network. The use of autoencoder with LSTM layers for unsupervised anomaly detection is discussed in [15]. This approach employs a sliding window technique to capture local temporal relationships within time series, though it was applied to a small dataset without irregularities. In [23] a deep learning framework incorporating Multi-Time Attention Networks is developed. It is designed for irregularly sampled time series derived from multi-source data. This framework learns continuous time embeddings and uses an attention mecha-nism to generate fixed-length representations from time series with varying observation counts. Experimental evaluations were carried on physiological and medical records. The problem of Precursor-of-Anomaly Detection for Irregular Time Series is inves-tigated in [24]. Their work addresses two objectives, detecting current anomalies and predicting future anomalies. They tackle this multi-task learning problem using a neural controlled differential equation-based network. Data irregularity is addressed through the synthesis of missing data in [2]. A score-based generative model is proposed for this purpose, aiming to reconstruct missing observations in irregular time series. Our work complements these efforts by introducing a new methodology that improves upon current research directions in this domain. Specifically, our framework processes existing sparse data to directly handle irregularity circumventing the need for synthesizing missing data or filling time gaps. 16 6.2 Non-Technical Losses 

In [25], an adaptive time-series recurrent neural network architecture for the detection of abnormal users is presented. It encompasses an oversampling technique by generating a set of new samples by random linear interpolation computation on existing minority samples. The method is evaluated on a small dataset. Synthetic Minority Over-Sampling is also used in [26]. The large dataset used contains daily consumption data and interpolation methods are used to address the limitations and missing data. For the detections of power theft a combination of Con-volutional NN and ML techniques is used. A large dataset is also used in the evaluation of [27] which encompasses daily consumptions labeled for malicious and normal users. The proposed method incorporates synthetic data generation and the use of a Genetic Algorithm on the labeled data. NN architectures enhanced with data synthesis procedures are proposed in [18] and [28] yielding promising results. The former is applied in a medium size data set while the latter in a small dataset. Convolutional autoencoder is used in [29] for electricity theft identification. The autoencoder extracts and identifies the abnormalities of electricity theft users against the uniformity and periodicity of normal power consumption features. The outcome of the autoencoder is further processed with ML techniques to build a prediction model. This study is applied in a small dataset with half an hour sampling. Autoencoder for non-technical losses is also used in [30] which also combines syn-thetic data procedures. The experimental application is conducted in a medium size dataset with daily data sampling. Using self-attention mechanisms for electricity theft detection is not a novel con-cept. In [31] an attention augmented convolutional NN architecture is proposed which exhibits interesting results in comparison to other deep learning methods. The exper-imental evaluation of the method is applied on a medium size dataset of labeled data enhanced with interpolated data. NN autoencoders combined with ML techniques for electricity theft detection are used in [32] and [33], yet the methods are evaluated against small datasets drawing limited conclusions. In similar design, a variational autoencoder equipped with an attention mechanism is proposed in [34], presenting interesting results when applied in a small size dataset formed by half an hour sampling Probabilistic forecasting using deep learning models is studied in [35]. It is a concept closely related to the analysis of uncertainties and risks like non-technical losses and this study provides a useful method for load analysis and forecasting in power systems, with a particular focus on residential daily electricity consumption. In the same spirit, [36] studies load forecasting on residential load profiles using machine learning techniques, specifically exhibiting the advantages of NN over traditional regression methods. Most of the aforementioned works are applied to small datasets, raising questions about their efficiency in big data. The datasets used for evaluation are typically formed through dense data collection and do not adequately address data sparsity, irregulari-ties or variable sampling rates. Similar to many methods in the literature, they rely on interpolation for missing data and employ processes for synthesizing labeled samples rather than directly addressing classification challenges. Conversely, our framework directly addresses sparsity and irregularity by leveraging existing data and tackles the challenge of missing labels, eliminating the need for interpolation or synthetic data generation. Moreover, the evaluation dataset that we 17 used is large and exhibits the efficiency of our approach, a characteristic shared by few other works in literature. 

# 7 Conclusions 

The transformer architecture is a powerful tool for time series analysis and classifica-tion. However, effectively handling sparse and irregular time series presents significant challenges that necessitate a more sophisticated approach. Encompassing local atten-tion enables the transformers to identify local relationships among the elements of a sequence, while data cleaning and normalization techniques enable the model to iden-tify high-level pattern in a dataset. These two enhancements, which form the core of our framework, empower the model with sufficient discriminative abilities when working with irregular time series datasets. The efficacy of our proposed model is demonstrated in the context of risk estima-tion for non-technical losses in electrical power systems. This application highlights the model’s capacity for performing efficient classification and to effectively overcome data irregularities. Given the significant importance and inherent complexity of non-technical losses risk estimation, this application clearly showcases the advantages of our method. 

# References 

[1] Khan, S.S., Madden, M.G.: One-class classification: taxonomy of study and review of techniques. The Knowledge Engineering Review 29 (3), 345–374 (2014) [2] Lim, H., Kim, M., Park, S., Lee, J., Park, N.: TSGM: Regular and Irregular Time-series Generation using Score-based Generative Models (2023) [3] Islam, S., Elmekki, H., Elsebai, A., Bentahar, J., Drawel, N., Rjoub, G., Pedrycz, W.: A comprehensive survey on applications of transformers for deep learning tasks. Expert Systems with Applications 241 , 122666 (2024) [4] Ahmed, S., Nielsen, I.E., Tripathi, A., Siddiqui, S., Ramachandran, R.P., Rasool, G.: Transformers in time-series analysis: A tutorial. Circuits, Systems, and Signal Processing 42 (12), 7433–7466 (2023) [5] Zhang, S., Fang, Y., Ren, Y.: Ecg autoencoder based on low-rank attention. Scientific Reports 14 (1), 12823 (2024) [6] Xiang, S., Li, X., Ding, J., Chen, S., Hua, Z.: Unidirectional local-attention autoen-coder network for spectral variability unmixing. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing (2024) [7] Huang, P.-Y., Xu, H., Li, J., Baevski, A., Auli, M., Galuba, W., Metze, F., Feicht-enhofer, C.: Masked autoencoders that listen. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 , 28708–28720 (2022) [8] Depuru, S.S.S.R., Wang, L., Devabhaktuni, V.: Electricity theft: Overview, issues, prevention and a smart meter based approach to control theft. Energy policy 

39 (2), 1007–1015 (2011) [9] Papadimitriou, C., Messinis, G., Vranis, D., Politopoulou, S., Hatziargyriou, N.: 18 Non-technical losses: detection methods and regulatory aspects overview. CIRED 24 2017 (1), 2830–2832 (2017) [10] Perifanis, V., Athanasiadis, C.L., Pavlidis, N., Efraimidis, P.S., Papadopoulos, T.A.: Towards Detecting Non-Technical Losses in Electrical Power Systems with Machine Learning. In: 2024 3rd International Conference on Energy Transition in the Mediterranean Area (SyNERGY MED), pp. 1–5 (2024). IEEE [11] Choi, K., Hawthorne, C., Simon, I., Dinculescu, M., Engel, J.: Encoding musical style with transformer autoencoders. In: International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1899–1908 (2020). PMLR [12] Beltagy, I., Peters, M.E., Cohan, A.: Longformer: The long-document transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05150 (2020) [13] Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser, L., Polosukhin, I.: Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-tion processing systems 30 (2017) [14] Ramachandran, P., Parmar, N., Vaswani, A., Bello, I., Levskaya, A., Shlens, J.: Stand-alone self-attention in vision models. Advances in neural information processing systems 32 (2019) [15] Provotar, O.I., Linder, Y.M., Veres, M.M.: Unsupervised anomaly detection in time series using lstm-based autoencoders. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Trends in Information Theory (ATIT), pp. 513–517 (2019). IEEE [16] Energypress: Energypress new portal. https://energypress.gr/index.php/news/ rae-sto-447-pososto-ton-reymatoklopon-2020-ti-deihnoyn-ta-istorika-stoiheia. Accessed on May 26, 2025 (2022) [17] HEDNO S.A.: HEDNO Datathon. https://deddie.gr/en/ kentro-enhmerwsis/deltia-tupou/deltia-typou-2023/fevrouarios-2023/ megali-simmetohi-hedno-datathon-deddie/. Accessed on May 26, 2025 (2023) [18] Lepolesa, L.J., Achari, S., Cheng, L.: Electricity theft detection in smart grids based on deep neural network. Ieee Access 10 , 39638–39655 (2022) [19] Chen, S., Yu, J., Wang, S.: One-dimensional convolutional auto-encoder-based feature learning for fault diagnosis of multivariate processes. Journal of Process Control 87 , 54–67 (2020) [20] Rubanova, Y., Chen, R.T., Duvenaud, D.K.: Latent ordinary differential equations for irregularly-sampled time series. Advances in neural information processing systems 32 (2019) [21] Li, S.C.-X., Marlin, B.: Learning from irregularly-sampled time series: A missing data perspective. In: International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5937– 5946 (2020). PMLR [22] Shukla, S.N., Marlin, B.M.: Interpolation-prediction networks for irregularly sampled time series. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.07782 (2019) 19 [23] Shukla, S.N., Marlin, B.M.: Multi-time attention networks for irregularly sampled time series. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.10318 (2021) [24] Jhin, S.Y., Lee, J., Park, N.: Precursor-of-anomaly detection for irregular time series. In: Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 917–929 (2023) [25] Lin, G., Feng, H., Feng, X., Wen, H., Li, Y., Hong, S., Ni, Z.: Electricity theft detection in power consumption data based on adaptive tuning recurrent neural network. Frontiers in Energy Research 9, 773805 (2021) [26] Zhu, S., Xue, Z., Li, Y.: Electricity theft detection in smart grids based on omni-scale cnn and autoxgb. IEEE Access 12 , 15477–15492 (2024) [27] Shehzad, F., Javaid, N., Aslam, S., Javed, M.U.: Electricity theft detection using big data and genetic algorithm in electric power systems. Electric Power Systems Research 209 , 107975 (2022) [28] El-Toukhy, A.T., Badr, M.M., Mahmoud, M.M., Srivastava, G., Fouda, M.M., Alsabaan, M.: Electricity theft detection using deep reinforcement learning in smart power grids. IEEE Access 11 , 59558–59574 (2023) [29] Cui, X., Liu, S., Lin, Z., Ma, J., Wen, F., Ding, Y., Yang, L., Guo, W., Feng, X.: Two-step electricity theft detection strategy considering economic return based on convolutional autoencoder and improved regression algorithm. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 37 (3), 2346–2359 (2021) [30] Javaid, N., Qasim, U., Yahaya, A.S., Alkhammash, E.H., Hadjouni, M., et al. :Non-technical losses detection using autoencoder and bidirectional gated recurrent unit to secure smart grids. IEEE Access 10 , 56863–56875 (2022) [31] Finardi, P., Campiotti, I., Plensack, G., Souza, R.D., Nogueira, R., Pinheiro, G., Lotufo, R.: Electricity theft detection with self-attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.06219 (2020) [32] Yan, K., Zhao, J., Ren, Y.: Electricity theft identification algorithm based on auto-encoder neural network and random forest. In: 2021 IEEE 5th Advanced Informa-tion Technology, Electronic and Automation Control Conference (IAEAC), vol. 5, pp. 2641–2645 (2021) [33] Huang, Y., Xu, Q.: Electricity theft detection based on stacked sparse denoising autoencoder. International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems 125 ,106448 (2021) [34] Takiddin, A., Ismail, M., Zafar, U., Serpedin, E.: Deep autoencoder-based anomaly detection of electricity theft cyberattacks in smart grids. IEEE Systems Journal 

16 (3), 4106–4117 (2022) [35] Lu, S., Xu, Q., Jiang, C., Liu, Y., Kusiak, A.: Probabilistic load forecasting with a non-crossing sparse-group lasso-quantile regression deep neural network. Energy 

242 , 122955 (2022) 20 [36] Tarmanini, C., Sarma, N., Gezegin, C., Ozgonenel, O.: Short term load forecasting based on arima and ann approaches. Energy Reports 9, 550–557 (2023) 21