Title: Are Large Language Models Suitable for Graph Computation? Progress and Prospects

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.06865v1

Published Time: Mon, 08 Jun 2026 00:24:20 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# Are Large Language Models Suitable for Graph Computation? Progress and Prospects 

## Yuting Zhang 1 Yi Han 1 Kai Wang 2 Wei Ni 3 Angela Bonifati 4 Wenjie Zhang 11University of New South Wales 

> 2

## Antai College of Economics and Management, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 

> 3

## Edith Cowan University 4Lyon 1 University 

## {yutingz, zhangw}@cse.unsw.edu.au yi.han.1@student.unsw.edu.au w.kai@sjtu.edu.cn w.ni@ecu.edu.au angela.bonifati@univ-lyon1.fr 

## Abstract 

Large language models (LLMs) have been increasingly explored for graph computation, where tasks require reasoning over structured relationships and algorithmic operations. Yet, it remains unclear when LLMs can reliably sup-port such computation and how they should be incorporated into graph-solving pipelines. Ex-isting surveys at the intersection of LLMs and graphs primarily focus on graph learning, text-attributed graphs, or graph-language modeling. To bridge this gap, we provide a comprehen-sive review of LLMs for graph computation through a role-based taxonomy. Specifically, we identify two major paradigms: i) LLMs as executors, where models directly solve graph tasks from graph descriptions and instructions; and ii) LLMs as planners, where models for-mulate problems, decompose reasoning steps, and invoke external tools or agents for execu-tion. Based on this taxonomy, we analyze the strengths and limitations of current methods. Our review indicates that LLMs are promising for simple, small-scale tasks, but remain unreli-able for large-scale and exactness-demanding tasks. Finally, we summarize available datasets and suggest four future directions. 

## 1 Introduction 

Graphs provide a natural representation for relation-ships in many real-world systems, such as social connections (Breuer et al., 2020), protein-protein interactions (Neyshabur et al., 2013), and paper citations (Das Gollapalli and Caragea, 2014). An-alyzing such graph-structured data often requires graph computation, which derives explicit struc-tural results or quantities from a given graph, such as shortest paths (Dijkstra, 1959), triangle counts (Azad et al., 2015), and cycle findings (Qiu et al., 2018). Such computation underlies a wide range of applications, including social network analysis (Newman, 2003), fraud detection (Lyu et al., 2020), and recommendation systems (He et al., 2017). However, the reliance on specialized knowledge of graph computation techniques creates a signif-icant barrier to applying graph-based analytics to real-world problems. Therefore, there is a need for approaches that can leverage LLMs to interpret user intent and translate it into computational so-lutions, lowering the barrier to graph computation (Liu et al., 2024a). Despite the needs and growing attention to the use of LLMs in addressing graph computational tasks (Guo et al., 2025), whether LLMs are fundamentally suitable for graph compu-tation remains controversial. Graph computation often requires exact structural reasoning and faith-ful tracking of vertices and edges or multi-step algorithmic execution, which differ substantially from the probabilistic next-token prediction objec-tive of LLMs. Existing studies have shown that LLMs may hallucinate graph structures, miss crit-ical edges, and suffer from severe performance degradation as graph size or reasoning depth in-creases (Liu et al., 2024b; Wang et al., 2024b; Hey-man and Zylberberg, 2025). These findings raise concerns about using LLMs for graph computation, especially in correctness-critical scenarios. As compared in Table 1, although a limited num-ber of surveys have explored LLMs for graphs, none have systematically examined the suitability of LLMs for graph computation. Ren et al. (2024) review methods that integrate LLMs with graph learning techniques, while Li et al. (2024c) focus on text-attributed graphs and categorize methods by the roles of LLMs in the model pipeline. Jin et al. (2024a) survey various graph types, but do not clearly distinguish graph computation from graph learning for graphs with limited textual semantics. Focusing on retrieval-augmented generation with graphs, Han et al. (2025) briefly mention graph computation when discussing LLM-based graph reasoning. Therefore, despite the rapid growth of this area, the literature on LLMs for graph compu-tation remains insufficiently organized. 

> arXiv:2606.06865v1 [cs.CL] 5 Jun 2026

Table 1: Comparison of existing surveys on LLMs for graph from four perspectives: graph-computation focus, task specification, performance comparison on reported experimental results, and dataset collection.                

> Survey Graph-comp. focus Tasks specification Performance summarization Dataset collection
> (Ren et al., 2024) G####
> (Jin et al., 2024a) G##
> (Li et al., 2024c) G####
> (Han et al., 2025) G#G##
> Ours
> : central and explicit coverage; G#: explicit but partial cover-age; #: no dedicated coverage.

This survey aims to bridge this gap by provid-ing an in-depth and systematic review focusing on LLMs for graph computations and exploring poten-tial avenues for future research. As shown in Table 1, our survey focuses on LLMs for graph compu-tation and explicitly provides definitions of related tasks, performance comparisons based on reported experimental results in each paper, and dataset col-lections within the scope. The contributions can be summarized as follows: 

• Role-based taxonomy. We introduce a new tax-onomy for categorizing research in LLMs for graph computational tasks. Our taxonomy clarifies the roles that LLMs participate in the graph computa-tional tasks. Building upon this foundation, we fur-ther sub-categorize the research based on the spe-cific techniques employed within each paradigm. 

• Comprehensive review and summary. Based on the proposed taxonomy, we review the current lit-erature, analyzing the strengths and limitations of each method. We also summarize the definitions and time complexity of representative graph com-putational tasks in Appendix B. In Appendix C, we assemble an extensive set of datasets for evaluating LLMs on graph computation. We also compare representative methods with their reported perfor-mance and code availability in Appendix D. 

• Evidence-based assessment and future directions. 

Based on existing evidence, we argue that LLMs are promising as flexible interfaces for easy tasks and small graphs, but are limited for large-scale graphs and correctness-critical graph tasks. Based on this analysis, we further propose four future directions, including developing semantic graph benchmarks, optimizing multi-step execution for complex graph queries, preserving the privacy of graphs in prompts and training data, and adapting LLMs to domain-specific graph structures. 

## 2 Background 

In this section, we first provide essential back-ground knowledge on graph computational tasks and LLMs. Then, we present our taxonomy of LLMs for graph computation. 

2.1 Definitions Graph-structured data. A graph G = ( V, E ) is a non-linear data structure that consists of a set of vertices V , and a set of edges E connecting these vertices. Each edge e ∈ E is associated with a pair of vertices (u, v ), where u and v are the endpoints of the edge. Depending on the specific information carried by their vertices and edges, graphs can be classified into various types. For example, directed graphs have directional edges 

e = ( u, v ) pointing from u to v, and edge-weighted graphs have a weight w(e) ∈ R for each edge. 

Graph description. As LLMs rely on a sequential text interface, describing the graph structure tex-tually is the fundamental step for enabling LLM-based graph computation. List structures (Tabas-sum et al., 2018), such as edge list and adjacency list, are commonly considered as graph representa-tion methods due to their space efficiency, which helps minimize token consumption when encoding graph data for LLMs. 

• The adjacency list L of a graph G with n vertices is a collection of n lists, where the list lu for each vertex u contains all vertices v such that there is an edge from u to v, i.e., lu = {v | (u, v ) ∈ E}.

• The edge list E of a graph G is a list of all edges in the graph. Each edge is represented as a pair 

(u, v ), where u and v are the endpoints of the edge, i.e., E = { (u, v ) | (u, v ) ∈ E }.Besides list-based representations, matrix-based representations, such as adjacency matrix (Harary, 1962) and incidence matrix (Fulkerson and Gross, 1965), and graph description languages such as Graph Modeling Language (Himsolt, 1997), and Graph Markup Language (Brandes et al., 2013) are also widely considered to describe graphs. 

Graph computational tasks. Graph computa-tional tasks are problems defined on graphs with the objective of discovering relational patterns, extract-ing structural properties, or computing mathemati-cal metrics of a given graph. Unlike graph learning tasks, e.g., node classification and link prediction, which produce learned predictions by learning pre-dictive models or latent representations from graph data, graph computational tasks are solved through Taxonomy 

> LLMs as Executors  Prompting
> NLGraph (Wang et al., 2023a), GPT4Graph (Guo et al., 2023), LLMtoGraph (Liu and Wu, 2023), LLM4DyG (Zhang et al., 2024b), GraCoRe (Yuan et al., 2025a), GraphArena (Tang et al., 2025), GraphPattern (Dai et al., 2025), LLMTM (Hao et al., 2026)
> Encoding
> Talk Like a Graph (Fatemi et al., 2024), GraphLLM (Chai et al., 2026), Graph-Token (Perozzi et al., 2024), GraphDO (Ge et al., 2025), GraphOmni (Xu et al., 2026), GraphInsight (Cao et al., 2025), (Xypolopoulos et al., 2025), CL-OWL (Zangari et al., 2026), DynamicTRF (Wei et al., 2025), DynamicGTR (Wei et al., 2026b)
> Post-training
> GraphWiz (Chen et al., 2024), GITA (Wei et al., 2024), InstructGraph (Wang et al., 2024a), GraphInstruct (Luo et al., 2025), NLGift (Zhang et al., 2024a), HLM-G (Khurana et al., 2024), GraphPRM (Peng et al., 2025), G1 (Guo et al., 2025), (Zhang et al., 2025c), GraphThought (Huang et al., 2025), (Shirai et al., 2025), NPG-Muse (Wang et al., 2026c)
> LLMs as Planners  Code Generation
> GraphArena (Tang et al., 2025), GCoder (Zhang et al., 2025b), GRRAF (Li et al., 2025), PIE (Gong et al., 2025), GraphMind (Zhang et al., 2025a), Simple-RTC (Hu et al., 2025), GraphSkill (Wang et al., 2026a)
> Function Calling
> Graph-ToolFormer (Zhang, 2023), LLM4Graph (Li et al., 2024a), Graph-CoT (Jin et al., 2024b), Graph-Grounded LLMs (Gupta et al., 2025), GraphChain (Wei et al., 2026a), GraphTool-Instruction (Wang et al., 2025), EGL-SCA (Yuan et al., 2026)
> Multi-agent Collaboration
> GraphTeam (Li et al., 2024b), GraphAgent-Reasoner (Hu et al., 2024), MA-GTS (Yuan et al., 2025b), GTA (Xu et al., 2025), GraphDC(Li and Cui, 2026), GraphVista(Han et al., 2026), GraphCogent(Wang et al., 2026b)

Figure 1: Taxonomy of LLMs for graph computation. 

algorithmic operations on graph structures and pro-duce deterministic results. Formally, given a graph 

G = ( V, E ), a graph computation task T refers to a problem that requires operations on the vertices and edges of G to produce the answer A. We have summarized the common tasks in Appendix B. 

Large language models. LLMs are highly parame-terized (i.e., billion-level) language models that are pre-trained on massive text corpora and designed to understand and generate content from text dis-tributions (Zhao et al., 2026). LLMs can be easily and efficiently fine-tuned on task-specific data to achieve better results across diverse downstream tasks. Beyond standard statistical text generation, LLMs can act as the central reasoning engine and be augmented with dynamic memory and exter-nal computational tools to function as autonomous agents. By giving the model access to external tools and memory, LLMs have demonstrated impressive capabilities in planning multi-step strategies and solving complex questions (Zhao et al., 2024; Mo-hammadi et al., 2025). 

LLMs for graph computation. LLMs for graph computation refer to methods that involve LLMs in the process of solving graph computational tasks. Given the textual description of graph G = ( V, E )

and a graph computation task T as the input, LLMs leverage their pre-trained knowledge, reasoning ca-pabilities, or the provided external tools to produce the corresponding answer A.

2.2 Taxonomy 

In this survey, we organize existing works by the role of LLMs in graph computation. As shown in Fig. 1, we summarize two main paradigms: LLMs as Executors and LLMs as Planners. 

• LLMs as executors. LLMs directly leverage their inherent reasoning abilities to solve graph problems. Existing executor-based methods mainly include three types: i) Prompting , which uses var-ious prompt designs to describe tasks; ii) Encod-ing , which focuses on representing graph struc-tures to LLMs via natural language or special-ized encoders; and iii) Post-training , which adapts LLMs to graph computation through fine-tuning on domain-specific graph datasets. 

• LLMs as planners. LLMs serve as high-level orchestrators for analyzing and solving graph com-putational tasks. This includes three primary ap-proaches: i) Code generation , where LLMs gener-ate executable code to solve graph computational tasks; ii) Function calling , where LLMs invoke predefined graph APIs or specialized tools to ex-tract a result; and iii) Multi-agent collaboration ,where multiple LLM-based agents cooperate to solve graph computational tasks. In the following sections, we review representa-tive studies under each category and discuss their strengths and limitations. 3 LLMs as Executors 

In this section, we focus on the paradigm of LLMs as executors. In this setting, LLMs are given a graph structure and a task instruction, perform rea-soning internally, and directly output the final an-swer without relying on external tools. We com-prehensively review the subcategories and discuss their advantages and limitations. 

3.1 Prompting 

To equip LLMs for graph computation without modifying their internal parameters, a robust line of research investigates advanced prompting tech-niques. This approach leverages the models’ inher-ent reasoning capabilities and pre-trained knowl-edge to interpret graph tasks strictly through natural language instructions. Early studies investigate how to adapt LLMs to graph computation. GPT4Graph (Guo et al., 2023) is among the first works to introduce a pipeline to integrate LLMs into graph computation. Be-yond general prompting strategies such as zero-shot prompting (Kojima et al., 2022), few-shot prompt-ing (Brown et al., 2020), chain-of-thought (Wei et al., 2022), least to most prompting (Zhou et al., 2023), and self-consistency (Wang et al., 2023b), Wang et al. (2023a) further enhance LLMs’ capa-bility on graph computation through Build-a-Graph Prompting and Algorithmic Prompting. Recent studies have improved prompting meth-ods to enable LLMs to handle a broader range of graph types and tasks. LLM4DyG (Zhang et al., 2024b) and LLMTM (Hao et al., 2026) evaluate dynamic graphs where each edge is associated with a timestamp t to capture the temporal evolution of a network. GraCoRe (Yuan et al., 2025a) evaluates heterogeneous graphs that include rich, multi-typed semantic information. To push the boundaries of task diversity, investigations have explored whether LLMs can reliably enumerate all valid solutions to multi-answer queries, such as finding all shortest paths (Liu and Wu, 2023). GraphArena (Tang et al., 2025) examines LLMs on solving polynomial-time tasks alongside NP-complete tasks on real-world datasets. Furthermore, the work (Dai et al., 2025) focuses on the tasks related to mining graph pat-terns, such as triangle, square, diamond, and house. 

3.2 Encoding 

Encoding is a crucial factor that can significantly affect LLMs’ performance on graph computation, as it serves as an important preprocessing technique for representing graph structures in sequence form. A major line of work improves LLM perfor-mance by designing more effective textual rep-resentations of graphs. GraphQA (Fatemi et al., 2024) experiments with different graph represen-tations. GraphDO (Ge et al., 2025) suggests that the optimal ordering strategy is closely tied to the inherent structural requirements of the target task. To help LLMs better leverage the graph structures, GraphInsight (Cao et al., 2025) places the most critical subgraph descriptions at the beginning and the end of the text sequence. Xypolopoulos et al. (2025) propose graph linearization methods that renumber vertices according to structural proper-ties such as centrality and degeneracy, and CL-OWL (Zangari et al., 2026) introduces a human-interpretable structural encoding scheme that uses colors to represent graphs. Besides, GraphOmni (Xu et al., 2026) proposes an RL-based adaptive mechanism to select the optimal combination of graph description and prompt. Beyond purely textual graph representations, an-other line of work injects graph structural knowl-edge into LLMs through specialized encoders. GraphLLM (Chai et al., 2026) employs a graph transformer to encode the graph structure into con-tinuous vector embeddings, which are then used as prefix embeddings for LLMs. Graph-Token (Per-ozzi et al., 2024) explores various GNN architec-tures to convert the graph into soft tokens that are fed into the LLM. Beyond embedding-based fusion, DynamicTRF (Wei et al., 2025) and DynamicGTR (Wei et al., 2026b) propose frameworks that dy-namically select the most suitable textual or visual graph representation, optimizing both answer accu-racy and response efficiency. 

3.3 Post-training 

Post-training methods adapt pre-trained LLMs for graph computation by optimizing them on graph-specific data. Compared with prompting and encoding, which keep model parameters fixed, post-training modifies the model to improve task-specific accuracy (Sanford et al., 2024). To improve the generalization capabilities of the fine-tuned model, some works adopt instruc-tion tuning. GraphInstruct (Luo et al., 2025) in-troduces a comprehensive benchmark covering 21 diverse tasks and introduces a label mask training to help LLMs learn node ID information during fine-tuning. NLGift (Zhang et al., 2024a) shows that fine-tuned LLMs may still rely on memorized graph patterns rather than general graph reasoning rules. To improve reasoning supervision, Graph-Thought (Huang et al., 2025) generates training tra-jectories through heuristic-guided forward reason-ing and solver-guided backward reasoning. Less is More (Shirai et al., 2025) further shows that LLMs instruction-tuned on textual input can outperform models with specialized graph encoders. Several works improve reliability and reduce hallucinations via Direct Preference Optimiza-tion (DPO), which aligns models with preference pairs, and Reinforcement Learning (RL), which optimizes via reward feedback. By using DPO, GraphWiz (Chen et al., 2024) further enhances the performance of instruction-tuned LLMs to align the model with the correct reasoning path. To build high-quality preference pairs for DPO, InstructGraph (Wang et al., 2024a) constructs hallucination-based negative examples, and Graph-PRM (Peng et al., 2025) uses Process Reward Mod-els to score intermediate reasoning steps. Zhang et al. (2025c) show that post-training alignment on synthetic graph data can partially transfer to real-world tasks with implicit graph structures. By adopting RL, G1 (Guo et al., 2025) enables LLMs to self-improve their graph reasoning abil-ities through rule-based verifiable rewards, and NPG-Muse (Wang et al., 2026c) introduces NP-hard graph problems as a training corpus. To enable LLMs on large graphs, several stud-ies have explored methods to reduce the compu-tational cost of the prompts, which can become lengthy when incorporating both feature and struc-tural information from graphs. HLM-G (Khu-rana et al., 2024) uses bespoke attention masks to force the token processing to remain localized within descriptions of single vertices, reducing the computational complexity from O  (P ni)2 to 

O  P ni2, where ni is the number of tokens de-scribing vertex vi. GITA (Wei et al., 2024) in-tegrates fine-tuned vision-language models into LLM-based graph computation and adopts k-hop subgraphs sampling, where the subgraph for vertex 

u is induced by all vertices within k steps from u.

3.4 Summary 

Methods reviewed in this section improve the abil-ity of LLMs to directly execute graph computation. Prompting-based methods improve model perfor-mance by encouraging models to think or follow intermediate computational steps. Encoding-based methods improve accuracy by presenting graph structures in forms that are easier for LLMs to parse and reason over. Post-training-based methods improve accuracy by directly optimizing LLMs on graph computation data. Compared with prompting and encoding, post-training can generally produce better task-specific performance. Although all three lines of work aim to make LLMs better graph executors, each category has its own limitations. For prompting, designing effec-tive prompts, such as few-shot and CoT, requires human effort and graph algorithm knowledge. Dif-ferent tasks also require task-specific prompts, lim-iting the flexibility of prompting methods across diverse graph tasks. For encoding, when the graph description becomes too long, models tend to for-get the middle section (Liu et al., 2024b; Hsieh et al., 2024). Although placing the critical sub-graph at the head and tail can improve the perfor-mance, it introduces additional cost to design the order. Post-training methods are restricted by their dependence on high-quality training datasets. Con-structing such datasets is costly, as they typically necessitate broad coverage over diverse graph tasks and graph types. Moreover, LLMs often exhibit performance degradation on tasks or graphs that are not in the training data (Chen et al., 2024). 

## 4 LLMs as Planners 

Although using LLMs as executors offers conve-nience and accessibility for general users, LLMs are probabilistic sequence models, which are frag-ile to operate like deterministic symbolic executors with guaranteed mathematical or algorithmic cor-rectness (Hahn, 2020; Dziri et al., 2023). The plan-ner paradigm shifts the LLMs from direct graph solving to external support such as programs, tools, or specialized agents, so that hallucination, omitted steps, and contextual overflow can be effectively avoided as the graph size and reasoning depth in-crease (Liu et al., 2024b; Heyman and Zylberberg, 2025; Wang et al., 2024b; Han et al., 2026). We re-view this paradigm through code generation, func-tion calling, and multi-agent collaboration. 

4.1 Code Generation 

LLMs have demonstrated strong natural-language-to-code generation ability, which shifts the uncer-tainty of token-level reasoning into a more reli-able computational process (Gao et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023, 2021; Li et al., 2022). GraphArena (Tang et al., 2025) first mentions code writing for graph computation and shows that executable solving can reduce errors caused by the repetitive iterative and backtracking opera-tions required by many graph algorithms. Follow-ing this direction, GCoder (Zhang et al., 2025b) collects code-oriented instruction-tuning data for graph computational problems and improves the LLM’s graph-solving ability through supervised fine-tuning on code generation. GraphMind (Zhang et al., 2025a) introduces a dataset featuring code-based solutions and execution traces, guiding LLMs to tackle graph problems programmatically. Simple-RTC (Hu et al., 2025) separates problem formatting, data extraction, algorithm reasoning, and code generation into a pipeline. Beyond simply generating code, several studies explore how LLMs can detect and handle execu-tion errors during graph computation. PIE (Gong et al., 2025) injects task-related pseudocode into prompts and uses repeated trial-and-error execu-tion, improving accuracy while keeping computa-tion cost controlled. GRRAF (Li et al., 2025) pro-vides a training-free variant by storing the graph in a graph database and prompting the LLM to generate executable NetworkX or Cypher queries, with error feedback and timeout control to keep graph access outside the model context. GraphSkill (Wang et al., 2026a) extends this code-based direc-tion by combining hierarchical retrieval over tech-nical documentation with self-generated small test cases, allowing the coding agent to reduce noisy retrieval and address logical errors. 

4.2 Function Calling 

Function calling provides a more stable and con-strained planner interface for graph computation, by allowing LLMs to select predefined graph APIs or tools from pre-existing graph toolkits or user-built libraries (Schick et al., 2023; Patil et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023; Patil et al., 2025). Some studies explore how LLMs can invoke predefined graph tools. For instance, Graph-ToolFormer (Zhang, 2023) teaches the model to in-sert graph loading and graph analysis calls into gen-erated statements. LLM4Graph (Li et al., 2024a) proposes a pipeline based on API documents of frequently-used graph libraries, enabling LLMs to leverage both document and code to analyze larger-scale graphs. GraphTool-Instruction (Wang et al., 2025) provides a more effective tool-using pipeline by explicitly decomposing graph reasoning into graph extraction, tool-name identification, and tool-parameter extraction. Recent work extends function calling to itera-tive settings. Graph-CoT (Jin et al., 2024b) intro-duces an iterative reasoning–interaction–execution framework for stepwise graph computation, allow-ing LLMs to focus on the information required at each step. Graph-Grounded LLMs (Gupta et al., 2025) connect LLMs with a graph library through closed-loop function calls to reduce hallucinations and mathematical inaccuracies. GraphChain (Wei et al., 2026a) enables large-scale graph computa-tion by letting LLMs compose graph tool-chains and compresses task-relevant graph information step by step. EGL-SCA (Yuan et al., 2026) im-proves graph tool-using agents by employing struc-tural credit assignment, which routes failures to either instruction updates or tool repairs. 

4.3 Multi-agent Collaboration 

Multi-agent collaboration provides a robust solu-tion for complex graph problems by distributing graph-solving responsibilities across specialized agents. In this way, it alleviates the single-planner brittleness of the long reasoning step error accumu-lation as the graph scale and difficulty increase. Some works follow a conventional multi-agent workflow design by assigning each agent a role in the graph-solving pipeline. GraphTeam (Li et al., 2024b) organizes graph solving into cooperating agents with different specialties, converting graph analysis from one-shot reasoning into a staged pro-cess. MA-GTS (Yuan et al., 2025b) follows a simi-lar role-specialized logic and extends to real-world graph computation problems where graph data may be implicit, noisy, and irregular. To further improve the scalability, some recent works decompose the graphs across multiple agents. GraphAgent-Reasoner (Hu et al., 2024) allocates a dedicated agent to process the information of a single vertex, employing a master LLM to organize the distributed computation and merge the answers. However, this method introduces computation over-head in distributed computations. GraphDC (Li and Cui, 2026) optimizes the computational cost by de-composing the graph into subgraphs rather than individual vertices, and letting the master agent process inter-subgraph edges. To address memory and scalability constraints, GraphCogent (Wang et al., 2026b) employs a sensory agent to partition large complex graphs into manageable overlapping subgraphs via a sliding window, which are subse-quently merged and indexed by a buffer agent. Besides, some works decompose complex graph tasks into sub-tasks. GTA (Xu et al., 2025) intro-duces a fine-tuned algorithm generator and algo-rithm decomposer to break down the graph tasks into manageable sub-steps. GraphVista (Han et al., 2026) introduces a planning agent that decomposes graph tasks and adaptively assigns them to textual retrieval or visual reasoning modules based on task requirements and structural dependencies. 

4.4 Summary 

Methods reviewed in this section improve graph computation by shifting LLMs from direct execu-tors to planners that coordinate external compu-tational resources. Code generation provides the most flexible planner interface, allowing LLMs to translate graph problems into executable programs and substantially improve accuracy and scalability by delegating graph-state tracking and algorithm execution to interpreters. Function calling enables LLMs to invoke predefined external tools, allowing complex graph operations to be performed more stably and efficiently, especially when the task matches an existing tool schema. By assigning different agents to specialized roles, multi-agent collaboration has the flexibility of code generation with the reliability of function calling, enabling the planner to handle more complex graph problems. However, each category also introduces distinct limitations. Code generation is prone to syntax er-rors, runtime bugs, API misuse, and input-format mismatches during the translation from a graph problem to executable code. Function calling is more constrained by tool coverage and composi-tionality. When it encounters an out-of-distribution operation, it may force the problem into the closest available function, causing invalid calls. Multi-agent collaboration suffers from computational overhead compared to the previous methods, as it requires intermediate message exchanges across multiple interaction turns (Tran and Kiela, 2026). Also, the intermediate errors may propagate across agents, leading to repeated and invalid communica-tion, latency, and tool invocation. 

## 5 Discussions and Future Directions 

In this section, we discuss whether LLMs are suit-able for graph computation tasks based on existing literature and outline promising future directions. 

5.1 Discussions 

LLMs as executors offer an effective, convenient, and accessible method for ordinary users to solve a wide range of graph problems simply by provid-ing a textual input. However, this direct execution approach is constrained to smaller graphs and only yields high accuracy on relatively simple tasks. By shifting exact graph computation from the LLMs to external tools, planner-based approaches achieved near-perfect performance on several widely used benchmarks and demonstrate strong scalability and effectiveness on large-scale graphs. Overall, LLMs are suitable for assisting graph computation effec-tively as planners that interpret, decompose, and delegate tasks to reliable tools or code, while as standalone executors, they are suitable only for small graphs and for scenarios where accuracy re-quirements are not stringent. Despite these promising capabilities, several challenges remain that limit a more reliable adop-tion of LLMs for graph computation. 

Scalability. Most executor-based methods achieve reasonable performance only on small graphs of up to 50 nodes (Cao et al., 2025). As the per-formance often drops when relevant information appears in the middle of a long context (Hu et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024b), LLMs struggle to faith-fully memorize the graph structures when textual descriptions become longer. Furthermore, the lim-ited context windows of LLMs prevent them from processing graphs whose descriptions exceed the maximum context length. Planner-based systems suffer from context and inference overhead from operations like compiler feedback, API documents, compressed graph states, or inter-agent communi-cation (Li et al., 2024a; Gong et al., 2025; Wei et al., 2026a; Hu et al., 2024). These operations consume considerable tokens and computation time, limiting the scalability to larger graphs. 

Generalization . Executor-based methods tend to memorize graph patterns and training tasks rather than acquiring generalizable graph reasoning prin-ciples (Zhang et al., 2025c). Their performance may degrade significantly when evaluated on un-seen graphs and tasks, indicating a reliance on su-perficial input patterns over true algorithmic under-standing (Zhang et al., 2024a). Additionally, LLM performance is highly sensitive to text and struc-tural representations. Different graph tasks and structures are better suited to specific prompting and encoding methods, necessitating careful opti-mization of these inputs (Fatemi et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2026). Some planner-based methods heav-ily depend on unified graph description methods, task formulations, tool interfaces, and execution environments. Such requirements limit their gen-eralization ability in real-world scenarios, where tasks, available tools, and environment constraints may vary significantly across domains. 

5.2 Future Directions 

Apart from the common objectives of expanding graph scale, tackling harder tasks, improving accu-racy, and minimizing token consumption, several other promising directions remain unexplored. 

• Benchmarks for queries with implicit graph struc-tures. Current benchmarks for LLM-based graph computation mostly provide explicit graph struc-tures. In many real-world scenarios, graphs are often implicit in queries or documents, such as transaction logs and medical records (Wang et al., 2024b; Hu et al., 2023). In such cases, LLMs need to recognize and identify the underlying graph structure (Hsieh et al., 2024; Bai et al., 2025). Moreover, selecting the correct computational pro-cedure is also challenging for LLMs, as subtle dif-ferences in task descriptions or graph structures may require different algorithms. For example, nu-merical values associated with edges may represent either timestamps or weights, leading to entirely different graph computation tasks. To this end, fu-ture benchmarks should evaluate LLM-based graph computation with implicit graph structures, bring-ing LLM-based graph computation closer to real-world scenarios. 

• Optimizing execution pipelines for complex graph queries. Complex graph queries often re-quire multi-step operations, whose execution or-der strongly affects computation cost and accu-racy (Wei et al., 2026a). Refining task-relevant intermediate subgraphs before complex steps im-proves efficiency and precision (Lyu et al., 2025). Without such optimization, executor-based meth-ods suffer from inflated token consumption and diminished accuracy, while planner-based methods experience longer runtimes when large subgraphs are fed into high-complexity operations. Therefore, future work should enable LLMs to decompose queries into optimized sub-task sequences, thereby enabling more scalable, efficient, and robust multi-step graph computation. 

• Privacy vulnerabilities. LLMs have been proven vulnerable to many attacks (Chen et al., 2025; Yao et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2025), while real-world graphs capture sensitive user information or rela-tionships (Imola et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2025d). For example, in e-commerce networks, vertices may include private attributes like home address, and edges reveal purchase or transaction records. In healthcare systems, the graph not only stores patient data within its vertices, but also its edges expose the patient-doctor associations. Through jailbreaking attacks, the graphs in the input prompt can be exposed to unauthorized users (Priyanshu et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2024). In addition, member-ship inference attacks may reveal whether specific vertices or edges appear in the training corpus (Das et al., 2025). It is essential to leverage LLMs for graph computation while ensuring data privacy. 

• LLMs for domain-specific graph computation. 

Many real-world applications involve domain-specific graphs beyond conventional structures, with features such as rich attributes, heterogene-ity, and temporal dependencies. For example, in a global metabolic network (Peregrín-Alvarez et al., 2009; Barabási et al., 2011), vertices en-code enzymes, with colors denoting metabolic su-perclasses and sizes indicating associated genome counts. In an attack graph (Ou et al., 2006; Kaynar and Sivrikaya, 2016), attributes of vertices indi-cate types, security conditions, vulnerabilities, and exploitability scores, while the direction of edges captures logical dependencies and attacker move-ments. However, due to the limited generalizability of current LLMs (Lu et al., 2025), directly apply-ing LLMs designed for general graph computation to these highly specialized graphs often results in low accuracy and severe hallucinations. Enabling LLMs to handle richer graph structures could im-prove their utility in complex real-world scenarios. 

## 6 Conclusions 

We systematically reviewed the status quo of LLMs for graph computation. Specifically, we introduced a new taxonomy based on the operational roles of models and provided a thorough review and comparison of methods within each paradigm. We summarized available datasets, source code, and ex-perimental performance of existing methods. Our review suggested that while LLMs perform well on small-scale graphs and simple tasks, they still exhibit limitations when faced with large-scale or high-precision demands, indicating opportunities for future research and improvement. Limitations 

As a survey paper, its limitations reflect the limi-tations of the LLM-based graph computation area. Although recent studies have made substantial progress in enabling LLMs to accurately solve graph computation tasks, LLMs still face substan-tial challenges when applied to graph-structured problems, including limited scalability, weak gen-eralization, and unreliable reasoning over complex structures. In addition, many important graph prob-lems have not been sufficiently covered by existing studies, such as community search and other ad-vanced graph query tasks. Besides, due to space constraints in the main text, several detailed summaries are placed in the appen-dices. These include representative graph computa-tion tasks, benchmark datasets, and existing LLM-based graph computation methods. The task sum-mary provides definitions of common graph com-putation problems and their computational com-plexities. The benchmark overview reports dataset statistics, including graph size, graph type, and task type. The method summary collects the source code availability of each method and summarizes the experimental results reported in the correspond-ing papers. We believe these materials are impor-tant and useful for readers. 

## References 

Ariful Azad, Aydin Buluç, and John Gilbert. 2015. Par-allel triangle counting and enumeration using matrix algebra. In 2015 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium Workshop , pages 804–811. IEEE. Yushi Bai, Shangqing Tu, Jiajie Zhang, Hao Peng, Xi-aozhi Wang, Xin Lv, Shulin Cao, Jiazheng Xu, Lei Hou, Yuxiao Dong, Jie Tang, and Juanzi Li. 2025. LongBench v2: Towards deeper understanding and reasoning on realistic long-context multitasks. In 

Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3639–3664, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Albert-László Barabási, Natali Gulbahce, and Joseph Loscalzo. 2011. Network medicine: a network-based approach to human disease. Nature Reviews Genet-ics , 12(1):56–68. Ulrik Brandes, Markus Eiglsperger, Jürgen Lerner, and Christian Pich. 2013. Graph markup language (GraphML). In Roberto Tamassia, editor, Handbook of Graph Drawing and Visualization , pages 517–541. Chapman and Hall/CRC. Adam Breuer, Roee Eilat, and Udi Weinsberg. 2020. Friend or faux: Graph-based early detection of fake accounts on social networks. In WWW ’20: The Web Conference 2020, Taipei, Taiwan, April 20-24, 2020 ,pages 1287–1297. ACM / IW3C2. Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, and 12 others. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc. Yukun Cao, Shuo Han, Zengyi Gao, Zezhong Ding, Xike Xie, and S Kevin Zhou. 2025. GraphInsight: Unlocking insights in large language models for graph structure understanding. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 12096–12134, Vienna, Austria. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Ziwei Chai, Tianjie Zhang, Liang Wu, Kaiqiao Han, Xiaohai Hu, Xuanwen Huang, and Yang Yang. 2026. Graphllm: Boosting graph reasoning ability of large language model. IEEE Transactions on Big Data ,12(2):475–483. Kang Chen, Xiuze Zhou, Yuanguo Lin, Shibo Feng, Li Shen, and Pengcheng Wu. 2025. A survey on privacy risks and protection in large language mod-els. Journal of King Saud University Computer and Information Sciences , 37(7):163. Article 163. Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, and 39 others. 2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code. Preprint , arXiv:2107.03374. Nuo Chen, Yuhan Li, Jianheng Tang, and Jia Li. 2024. Graphwiz: An instruction-following language model for graph computational problems. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowl-edge Discovery and Data Mining , KDD ’24, page 353–364, New York, NY, USA. Association for Com-puting Machinery. Wenhu Chen, Xueguang Ma, Xinyi Wang, and William W. Cohen. 2023. Program of thoughts prompting: Disentangling computation from rea-soning for numerical reasoning tasks. Preprint ,arXiv:2211.12588. Xinnan Dai, Haohao Qu, Yifei Shen, Bohang Zhang, Qihao Wen, Wenqi Fan, Dongsheng Li, Jiliang Tang, and Caihua Shan. 2025. How do large language mod-els understand graph patterns? a benchmark for graph pattern comprehension. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pages 58405–58435. Badhan Chandra Das, M. Hadi Amini, and Yanzhao Wu. 2025. Security and privacy challenges of large language models: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv. ,57(6). Sujatha Das Gollapalli and Cornelia Caragea. 2014. Ex-tracting keyphrases from research papers using cita-tion networks. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 28(1). E. W. Dijkstra. 1959. A note on two problems in con-nexion with graphs. Numer. Math. , 1(1):269–271. Nouha Dziri, Ximing Lu, Melanie Sclar, Xiang (Lor-raine) Li, Liwei Jiang, Bill Yuchen Lin, Sean Welleck, Peter West, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Jena Hwang, Soumya Sanyal, Xiang Ren, Allyson Et-tinger, Zaid Harchaoui, and Yejin Choi. 2023. Faith and fate: Limits of transformers on compositional-ity. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 70293–70332. Curran As-sociates, Inc. Bahare Fatemi, Jonathan Halcrow, and Bryan Perozzi. 2024. Talk like a graph: Encoding graphs for large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pages 43909–43934. Delbert Fulkerson and Oliver Gross. 1965. Incidence matrices and interval graphs. Pacific journal of math-ematics , 15(3):835–855. Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and Gra-ham Neubig. 2023. PAL: Program-aided language models. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 202 of 

Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 10764–10799. PMLR. Yuyao Ge, Shenghua Liu, Baolong Bi, Yiwei Wang, Lingrui Mei, Wenjie Feng, Lizhe Chen, and Xueqi Cheng. 2025. Can graph descriptive order affect solving graph problems with LLMs? In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 6404–6420, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Chang Gong, Wanrui Bian, Zhijie Zhang, and Weiguo Zheng. 2025. Pseudocode-injection magic: Enabling llms to tackle graph computational tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.13731 .Jiayan Guo, Lun Du, Hengyu Liu, Mengyu Zhou, Xinyi He, and Shi Han. 2023. Gpt4graph: Can large lan-guage models understand graph structured data ? an empirical evaluation and benchmarking. Preprint ,arXiv:2305.15066. Xiaojun Guo, Ang Li, Yifei Wang, Stefanie Jegelka, and Yisen Wang. 2025. G1: Teaching llms to reason on graphs with reinforcement learning. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.18499. Piyush Gupta, Sangjae Bae, and David Isele. 2025. Graph-grounded llms: Leveraging graphical func-tion calling to minimize llm hallucinations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.10941 .Michael Hahn. 2020. Theoretical limitations of self-attention in neural sequence models. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 8:156– 171. Haoyu Han, Yu Wang, Harry Shomer, Kai Guo, Ji-ayuan Ding, Yongjia Lei, Mahantesh Halappanavar, Ryan A. Rossi, Subhabrata Mukherjee, Xianfeng Tang, Qi He, Zhigang Hua, Bo Long, Tong Zhao, Neil Shah, Amin Javari, Yinglong Xia, and Jiliang Tang. 2025. Retrieval-augmented generation with graphs (graphrag). Preprint , arXiv:2501.00309. Shuo Han, Yukun Cao, Zezhong Ding, Zengyi Gao, S Kevin Zhou, and Xike Xie. 2026. See or say graphs: Agent-driven scalable graph structure un-derstanding with vision-language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2510.16769. Bing Hao, Minglai Shao, Zengyi Wo, Yunlong Chu, Yuhang Liu, and Ruijie Wang. 2026. Llmtm: Benchmarking and optimizing llms for temporal motif analysis in dynamic graphs. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,40(17):14802–14810. Frank Harary. 1962. The determinant of the adjacency matrix of a graph. Siam Review , 4(3):202–210. Xiangnan He, Lizi Liao, Hanwang Zhang, Liqiang Nie, Xia Hu, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2017. Neural collabora-tive filtering. In Proceedings of the 26th international conference on world wide web , pages 173–182. Alex Heyman and Joel Zylberberg. 2025. Reason-ing large language model errors arise from hal-lucinating critical problem features. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.12151. Michael Himsolt. 1997. Gml: Graph modelling lan-guage. University of Passau .Cheng-Ping Hsieh, Simeng Sun, Samuel Kriman, Shan-tanu Acharya, Dima Rekesh, Fei Jia, Yang Zhang, and Boris Ginsburg. 2024. Ruler: What’s the real context size of your long-context language models? 

Preprint , arXiv:2404.06654. Yuntong Hu, Zheng Zhang, and Liang Zhao. 2023. Be-yond text: A deep dive into large language mod-els’ ability on understanding graph data. Preprint ,arXiv:2310.04944. Yuwei Hu, Xinyi Huang, Zhewei Wei, Yongchao Liu, and Chuntao Hong. 2025. Rethinking and bench-marking large language models for graph reasoning. 

Preprint , arXiv:2509.24260. Yuwei Hu, Runlin Lei, Xinyi Huang, Zhewei Wei, and Yongchao Liu. 2024. Scalable and accurate graph rea-soning with llm-based multi-agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.05130 .Zixiao Huang, Lifeng Guo, Wenhao Li, Junjie Sheng, Chuyun Shen, Haosheng Chen, Bo Jin, Changhong Lu, and Xiangfeng Wang. 2025. Graphthought: Graph combinatorial optimization with thought gen-eration. Preprint , arXiv:2502.11607. Jacob Imola, Takao Murakami, and Kamalika Chaud-huri. 2022. Differentially private triangle and 4-cycle counting in the shuffle model. Preprint ,arXiv:2205.01429. Bowen Jin, Gang Liu, Chi Han, Meng Jiang, Heng Ji, and Jiawei Han. 2024a. Large language models on graphs: A comprehensive survey. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , 36(12):8622– 8642. Bowen Jin, Chulin Xie, Jiawei Zhang, Kashob Kumar Roy, Yu Zhang, Zheng Li, Ruirui Li, Xianfeng Tang, Suhang Wang, Yu Meng, and Jiawei Han. 2024b. Graph chain-of-thought: Augmenting large language models by reasoning on graphs. In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 ,pages 163–184, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Kerem Kaynar and Fikret Sivrikaya. 2016. Distributed attack graph generation. IEEE Transactions on De-pendable and Secure Computing , 13(5):519–532. Sambhav Khurana, Xiner Li, Shurui Gui, and Shui-wang Ji. 2024. A hierarchical language model for interpretable graph reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.22372 .Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yu-taka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. 2022. Large language models are zero-shot reasoners. In Pro-ceedings of the 36th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’22, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. Hanqing Li, Sharika Mahadevan, Kiran Jyothi Sheena, Henry Liang, and Diego Klabjan. 2025. Zero-shot graph reasoning via retrieval augmented framework with LLMs. In Findings of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 17041– 17054, Suzhou, China. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Minghao Li, Yingxiu Zhao, Bowen Yu, Feifan Song, Hangyu Li, Haiyang Yu, Zhoujun Li, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. 2023. API-bank: A comprehensive benchmark for tool-augmented LLMs. In Proceed-ings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 3102–3116, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Wenjin Li and Jiaming Cui. 2026. Graphdc: A divide-and-conquer multi-agent system for scalable graph algorithm reasoning. Preprint , arXiv:2605.06671. Xin Li, Weize Chen, Qizhi Chu, Haopeng Li, Zhao-jun Sun, Ran Li, Chen Qian, Yiwei Wei, Zhiyuan Liu, Chuan Shi, and 1 others. 2024a. Can large lan-guage models analyze graphs like professionals? a benchmark, datasets and models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:141045–141070. Xin Li, Qizhi Chu, Yubin Chen, Yang Liu, Yaoqi Liu, Zekai Yu, Weize Chen, Chen Qian, Chuan Shi, and Cheng Yang. 2024b. Graphteam: Facilitating large language model-based graph analysis via multi-agent collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.18032 .Yuhan Li, Zhixun Li, Peisong Wang, Jia Li, Xiangguo Sun, Hong Cheng, and Jeffrey Xu Yu. 2024c. A sur-vey of graph meets large language model: Progress and future directions. Preprint , arXiv:2311.12399. Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kush-man, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom Ec-cles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, Thomas Hubert, Peter Choy, Cyprien de Mas-son d’Autume, Igor Babuschkin, Xinyun Chen, Po-Sen Huang, Johannes Welbl, Sven Gowal, Alexey Cherepanov, and 7 others. 2022. Competition-level code generation with alphacode. Science ,378(6624):1092–1097. Chang Liu and Bo Wu. 2023. Evaluating large language models on graphs: Performance insights and compar-ative analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11224 .Hao Liu, Jiarui Feng, Lecheng Kong, Ningyue Liang, Dacheng Tao, Yixin Chen, and Muhan Zhang. 2024a. One for all: Towards training one graph model for all classification tasks. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pages 20188–20210. Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paran-jape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. 2024b. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Transactions of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics , 12:157–173. Wei Lu, Rachel K. Luu, and Markus J. Buehler. 2025. Fine-tuning large language models for domain adap-tation: exploration of training strategies, scaling, model merging and synergistic capabilities. npj Com-putational Materials , 11(1):84. Zihan Luo, Xiran Song, Hong Huang, Jianxun Lian, Chenhao Zhang, Jinqi Jiang, Xing Xie, and Hai Jin. 2025. Graphinstruct: Empowering large language models with graph understanding and reasoning ca-pability. Preprint , arXiv:2403.04483. B. Lyu, L. Qin, X. Lin, Y. Zhang, Z. Qian, and J. Zhou. 2020. Maximum biclique search at billion scale. Pro-ceedings of the VLDB Endowment , 13:1359–1372. Bingqing Lyu, Xiaoli Zhou, Longbin Lai, Yufan Yang, Yunkai Lou, Wenyuan Yu, Ying Zhang, and Jingren Zhou. 2025. A modular graph-native query opti-mization framework. In Companion of the 2025 International Conference on Management of Data ,SIGMOD/PODS ’25, page 566–579, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Mahmoud Mohammadi, Yipeng Li, Jane Lo, and Wendy Yip. 2025. Evaluation and benchmarking of llm agents: A survey. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining V.2 , KDD ’25, page 6129–6139, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machin-ery. Mark EJ Newman. 2003. The structure and function of complex networks. SIAM review , 45(2):167–256. Behnam Neyshabur, Ahmadreza Khadem, Somaye Hashemifar, and Seyed Shahriar Arab. 2013. Netal: A new graph-based method for global alignment of protein-protein interaction networks. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) , 29. Xinming Ou, Wayne F. Boyer, and Miles A. McQueen. 2006. A scalable approach to attack graph genera-tion. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security , CCS ’06, page 336–345, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Shishir G Patil, Huanzhi Mao, Fanjia Yan, Char-lie Cheng-Jie Ji, Vishnu Suresh, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. 2025. The berkeley function calling leaderboard (BFCL): From tool use to agentic evaluation of large language models. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning .Shishir G. Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Xin Wang, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. 2024. Gorilla: Large language model connected with massive apis. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 126544–126565. Curran Associates, Inc. Miao Peng, Nuo Chen, Zongrui Suo, and Jia Li. 2025. Rewarding graph reasoning process makes llms more generalized reasoners. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining V.2 , KDD ’25, page 2257–2268, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. José M. Peregrín-Alvarez, Chris Sanford, and John Parkinson. 2009. The conservation and evolution-ary modularity of metabolism. Genome Biology ,10(6):R63. Bryan Perozzi, Bahare Fatemi, Dustin Zelle, An-ton Tsitsulin, Mehran Kazemi, Rami Al-Rfou, and Jonathan Halcrow. 2024. Let your graph do the talk-ing: Encoding structured data for llms. Preprint ,arXiv:2402.05862. Aman Priyanshu, Supriti Vijay, Ayush Kumar, Rak-shit Naidu, and Fatemehsadat Mireshghallah. 2023. Are chatbots ready for privacy-sensitive applications? an investigation into input regurgitation and prompt-induced sanitization. Preprint , arXiv:2305.15008. Xiafei Qiu, Wubin Cen, Zhengping Qian, You Peng, Ying Zhang, Xuemin Lin, and Jingren Zhou. 2018. Real-time constrained cycle detection in large dynamic graphs. Proc. VLDB Endow. ,11(12):1876–1888. Xubin Ren, Jiabin Tang, Dawei Yin, Nitesh Chawla, and Chao Huang. 2024. A survey of large language models for graphs. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , KDD ’24, page 6616–6626, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Clayton Sanford, Bahare Fatemi, Ethan Hall, Anton Tsitsulin, Mehran Kazemi, Jonathan Halcrow, Bryan Perozzi, and Vahab Mirrokni. 2024. Understanding transformer reasoning capabilities via graph algo-rithms. In Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems , volume 37, pages 78320–78370. Curran Associates, Inc. Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessi, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettle-moyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 68539–68551. Curran Associates, Inc. Sola Shirai, Kavitha Srinivas, Julian Dolby, Michael Katz, Horst Samulowitz, and Shirin Sohrabi. 2025. Less is more: Learning graph tasks with just llms. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10115 .Shazia Tabassum, Fabiola Pereira, Sofia Fernandes, and João Gama. 2018. Social network analysis: An overview. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery , 8:e1256. Jianheng Tang, Qifan Zhang, Yuhan Li, Nuo Chen, and Jia Li. 2025. Grapharena: Evaluating and exploring large language models on graph computation. In In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations ,volume 2025, pages 48118–48145. Xinyu Tang, Richard Shin, Huseyin A. Inan, Andre Manoel, Fatemehsadat Mireshghallah, Zinan Lin, Sivakanth Gopi, Janardhan Kulkarni, and Robert Sim. 2024. Privacy-preserving in-context learning with differentially private few-shot generation. Preprint ,arXiv:2309.11765. Dat Tran and Douwe Kiela. 2026. Single-agent llms outperform multi-agent systems on multi-hop reason-ing under equal thinking token budgets. Preprint ,arXiv:2604.02460. Fali Wang, Chenglin Weng, Xianren Zhang, Siyuan Hong, Hui Liu, and Suhang Wang. 2026a. Graph-skill: Documentation-guided hierarchical retrieval-augmented coding for complex graph reasoning. 

Preprint , arXiv:2603.06620. Heng Wang, Shangbin Feng, Tianxing He, Zhaoxuan Tan, Xiaochuang Han, and Yulia Tsvetkov. 2023a. Can language models solve graph problems in nat-ural language? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:30840–30861. Jianing Wang, Junda Wu, Yupeng Hou, Yao Liu, Ming Gao, and Julian McAuley. 2024a. InstructGraph: Boosting large language models via graph-centric instruction tuning and preference alignment. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 13492–13510, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Rongzheng Wang, Shuang Liang, Qizhi Chen, Yihong Huang, Muquan Li, Yizhuo Ma, Dongyang Zhang, Ke Qin, and Man-Fai Leung. 2026b. Graphcogent: Mitigating llms’ working memory constraints via multi-agent collaboration in complex graph under-standing. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Confer-ence 2026 , WWW ’26, page 3811–3822, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Rongzheng Wang, Shuang Liang, Qizhi Chen, Jiasheng Zhang, and Ke Qin. 2025. Graphtool-instruction: Revolutionizing graph reasoning in llms through de-composed subtask instruction. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining V.1 , KDD ’25, page 1492–1503, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdh-ery, and Denny Zhou. 2023b. Self-consistency im-proves chain of thought reasoning in language mod-els. Preprint , arXiv:2203.11171. Yanbang Wang, Hejie Cui, and Jon Kleinberg. 2024b. Microstructures and accuracy of graph recall by large language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 65154–65182. Curran Associates, Inc. Yuyao Wang, Bowen Liu, Jianheng Tang, Nuo Chen, Yuhan Li, Qifan Zhang, Chenyi Zi, Chen Zhang, and Jia Li. 2026c. Npg-muse: Scaling long chain-of-thought reasoning with np-hard graph problems. 

Preprint , arXiv:2508.20373. Chunyu Wei, Wenji Hu, Xingjia Hao, Xin Wang, Yifan Yang, Yunhai Wang, Yang Tian, and Yueguo Chen. 2026a. Graphchain: Large language models for large-scale graph analysis via tool chaining. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38:7402– 7436. Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou. 2022. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Yanbin Wei, Shuai Fu, Weisen Jiang, Zejian Zhang, Zhixiong Zeng, Qi Wu, James Kwok, and Yu Zhang. 2024. Gita: Graph to visual and textual integration for vision-language graph reasoning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 44–72. Curran Associates, Inc. Yanbin Wei, Jiangyue Yan, Chun Kang, Yang Chen, Hua Liu, James Kwok, and Yu Zhang. 2026b. Dy-namicgtr: Leveraging graph topology representation preferences to boost vlm capabilities on graph qas. 

Preprint , arXiv:2602.21864. Yanbin Wei, Jiangyue Yan, Chun Kang, Yang Chen, Hua Liu, James T. Kwok, and Yu Zhang. 2025. Harnessing adaptive topology representations for zero-shot graph question answering. Preprint ,arXiv:2508.06345. Hao Xu, Xiangru Jian, Xinjian Zhao, Wei Pang, Chao Zhang, Suyuchen Wang, Qixin Zhang, Zhengyuan Dong, Joao Monteiro, Bang Liu, Qiuzhuang Sun, and Tianshu Yu. 2026. Graphomni: A comprehen-sive and extensible benchmark framework for large language models on graph-theoretic tasks. Preprint ,arXiv:2504.12764. Zixiang Xu, Yanbo Wang, Yue Huang, Chenxi Wang, Lang Gao, Zirui Song, Zhaorun Chen, Xiangliang Zhang, and Xiuying Chen. 2025. Gta: Graph theory agent and benchmark for algorithmic graph reasoning with llms. Christos Xypolopoulos, Guokan Shang, Xiao Fei, Gi-annis Nikolentzos, Hadi Abdine, Iakovos Evdai-mon, Michail Chatzianastasis, Giorgos Stamou, and Michalis Vazirgiannis. 2025. Graph linearization methods for reasoning on graphs with large language models. Preprint , arXiv:2410.19494. Yifan Yao, Jinhao Duan, Kaidi Xu, Yuanfang Cai, Zhibo Sun, and Yue Zhang. 2024. A survey on large lan-guage model (llm) security and privacy: The good, the bad, and the ugly. High-Confidence Computing ,4(2):100211. Miao Yu, Fanci Meng, Xinyun Zhou, Shilong Wang, Junyuan Mao, Linsey Pan, Tianlong Chen, Kun Wang, Xinfeng Li, Yongfeng Zhang, Bo An, and Qingsong Wen. 2025. A survey on trustworthy llm agents: Threats and countermeasures. In Proceed-ings of the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowl-edge Discovery and Data Mining V.2 , KDD ’25, page 6216–6226, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Zike Yuan, Yukun Cao, Han Zhang, Jianzhi Yan, Le Liu, Cai ke, Yue Yu, Hui Wang, Ming Liu, and Bing Qin. 2026. Egl-sca: Structural credit assignment for co-evolving instructions and tools in graph reasoning agents. Preprint , arXiv:2605.10366. Zike Yuan, Ming Liu, Hui Wang, and Bing Qin. 2025a. GraCoRe: Benchmarking graph comprehension and complex reasoning in large language models. In 

Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 7925–7948, Abu Dhabi, UAE. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Zike Yuan, Ming Liu, Hui Wang, and Bing Qin. 2025b. MA-GTS: A multi-agent framework for solving com-plex graph problems in real-world applications. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 19286–19304, Suzhou, China. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Angelo Zangari, Peyman Baghershahi, and Sourav Me-dya. 2026. Colorful talks with graphs: Human-interpretable graph encodings for large language models. Preprint , arXiv:2602.10386. Jiawei Zhang. 2023. Graph-toolformer: To em-power llms with graph reasoning ability via prompt augmented by chatgpt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11116 .Qifan Zhang, Nuo Chen, Zehua Li, Miao Peng, Jing Tang, and Jia Li. 2025a. Improving llms’ generalized reasoning abilities by graph problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.17168 .Qifan Zhang, Xiaobin Hong, Jianheng Tang, Nuo Chen, Yuhan Li, Wenzhong Li, Jing Tang, and Jia Li. 2025b. Gcoder: Improving large language model for generalized graph reasoning. In Proceedings of the 34th ACM International Conference on Informa-tion and Knowledge Management , CIKM ’25, page 4149–4159, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Qifan Zhang, Jianhao Ruan, Aochuan Chen, Kang Zeng, Nuo Chen, Jing Tang, and Jia Li. 2026. Exposing weaknesses of large reasoning models through graph algorithm problems. Preprint , arXiv:2602.06319. Yizhuo Zhang, Heng Wang, Shangbin Feng, Zhaox-uan Tan, Xiaochuang Han, Tianxing He, and Yulia Tsvetkov. 2024a. Can llm graph reasoning generalize beyond pattern memorization? In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 2289–2305. Yizhuo Zhang, Heng Wang, Shangbin Feng, Zhaox-uan Tan, Xinyun Liu, and Yulia Tsvetkov. 2025c. Generalizable llm learning of graph synthetic data with post-training alignment. Preprint ,arXiv:2506.00845. Yuting Zhang, Wei Ni, Kai Wang, Yizhang He, and Conggai Li. 2025d. Truss decomposition under edge local differential privacy. In 2025 IEEE 41st Inter-national Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE) ,pages 2670–2683. Zeyang Zhang, Xin Wang, Ziwei Zhang, Haoyang Li, Yijian Qin, and Wenwu Zhu. 2024b. LLM4DyG: Can large language models solve spatial-temporal prob-lems on dynamic graphs? In Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages 4350–4361. Association for Computing Machinery. Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. 2024. Expel: Llm agents are experiential learners. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,38(17):19632–19642. Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min, Beichen Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, Yifan Du, Chen Yang, Yushuo Chen, Zhipeng Chen, Jinhao Jiang, Ruiyang Ren, Yifan Li, Xinyu Tang, Zikang Liu, and 3 others. 2026. A survey of large language models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2303.18223. Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, and Ed Chi. 2023. Least-to-most prompting enables complex reasoning in large language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2205.10625. Yingjie Zhu, Xuefeng Bai, Kehai Chen, Yang Xiang, Jun Yu, and Min Zhang. 2025. Benchmarking and improving large vision-language models for funda-mental visual graph understanding and reasoning. In 

Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 30678–30701, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

## A Scope Definition and Paper Selection 

We collected candidate papers from major aca-demic databases and preprint archives, including ACL Anthology, arXiv, Google Scholar, Semantic Scholar, DBLP, and OpenReview. The primary cri-terion for inclusion was an explicit focus on LLMs participating in algorithmic graph computational tasks. To maintain this focused scope, we distin-guish our survey from the broader literature on traditional graph learning tasks (e.g., graph classi-fication, link prediction, or node classification), as well as from purely multimodal approaches without direct LLM integration. 

## B Summary of Graph Computation Tasks 

A broad range of graph computation tasks has been explored in LLM-based methods, ranging from sim-ple queries such as checking whether an edge exists to complex problems such as finding a Hamiltonian path. To provide a systematic overview of the tasks used in existing studies, we summarize representa-tive graph tasks in Table 2, including the definition and computational complexity. Following prior work on graph computation benchmarks (Chen et al., 2024), we categorize these tasks by computational complexity into linear-time, polynomial-time, and NP-complete tasks. Be-cause computational complexity captures the in-trinsic algorithmic difficulty of a task, it directly reflects the different reasoning requirements im-posed on LLMs. Consequently, organizing tasks by complexity provides a natural framework for Table 2: Summary of representative graph computation tasks, their definitions, and computational complexity. 

Task Definition Time Complexity 

Linear-time graph computation tasks 

Vertex Degree Given an undirected graph G and a vertex v, return deg( v). O(n)

Edge Existence Given a graph G and vertices u, v , determine whether edge (u, v ) exists in G. O(n)

Common Neighbors Given a graph G and vertices u, v , return their common neighbors. O(n)

Graph Traversal Given a graph G and a source vertex s, visit every vertex from s. O(n + m)

Connectivity Given an undirected graph G and vertices u, v , determine whether a path connects them. 

O(n + m)

Connected Components Given a graph G, partition its vertices into maximal connected components. O(n + m)

Cycle Detection Given a directed graph G, determine whether it contains a directed cycle. O(n + m)

Bipartite Graph Check Given a graph G, determine whether its vertices can be divided into two sets such that no edge connects vertices within the same set. 

O(n + m)

Eulerian Path / Circuit Given a graph G, determine whether it has a trail that visits every edge exactly once. O(n + m)

Topological Sort Given a directed acyclic G, output a linear ordering of all vertices in V such that for every directed edge (u, v ) ∈ E, vertex u appears before vertex v in the ordering. 

O(n + m)

Polynomial-time graph computation tasks 

Shortest Path Given an edge-weighted graph G, source vertex u, and target vertex v, find a minimum-weight path from u to v.

O(m+n log n)

Graph Diameter Given a graph G, compute the largest shortest-path distance between two vertices. O(n(n + m)) 

Minimum Spanning Tree Given an edge-weighted graph G, find a spanning tree that connects all vertices and has the minimum possible total edge weight. 

O(m)

Maximum Triangle Sum Given a vertex-weighted graph G, find a triangle with maximum total vertex weight. O(m3/2)

Maximum Flow Given a directed graph G with edge capacities, a source vertex s, and a sink vertex t,compute the maximum s–t flow. 

O(nm 2)

Bipartite Matching Given a bipartite graph G, output a set of edges such that no two chosen edges share the same endpoint. 

O(m√n)

Triangle Counting Given a graph G, count its triangles. A triangle is a cycle of length 3. O(m3/2)

Clustering Coefficient Given a graph G, compute exact local or global clustering coefficients that measure how likely the neighbors of a vertex are to be connected to each other. 

O(m3/2)

PageRank Given a directed graph G, compute PageRank scores for T power iterations. O(T (n + m)) 

NP-complete graph computation tasks 

Hamiltonian Path / Cycle Given a graph G, determine whether there exists a simple path or cycle that visits every vertex in G exactly once. NP-complete Traveling Salesman Problem Given a complete weighted graph G and a bound B, determine whether G has a Hamiltonian cycle of weight at most B.NP-complete Maximum Clique Given a graph G and an integer r, determine whether G has a clique of size at least r. NP-complete Maximum Independent Set Given a graph G, determine whether there exists a subset of vertices such that no two vertices in the subset are adjacent. NP-complete Minimum Vertex Cover Given a graph G and an integer r, determine whether there exists a subset of vertices of size at most r such that every edge in G has at least one endpoint in the subset. NP-complete Graph Coloring Given a graph G and an integer c ≥ 3, determine whether G has a proper c-coloring. NP-complete Dominating Set Given a graph G and an integer r, determine whether there exists a set of at most r

vertices such that every vertex in G is either in the set or adjacent to a vertex in the set. NP-complete Subgraph Matching Given a host graph G and a pattern graph H, determine whether H is isomorphic to a subgraph of G.NP-complete Graph Edit Distance Given graphs G1, G2, and a bound B, determine whether G1 can be transformed into 

G2 using at most B edit operations. NP-complete Maximum Common Sub-graph Given graphs G1, G2, and an integer r, determine whether they have a common subgraph with at least r vertices. NP-complete 

T : the number of PageRank iterations. comparing the reasoning abilities of LLMs in han-dling graph computation. In complexity analysis, we refer to standard graph algorithms and denote the number of vertices and edges by n = |V | and 

m = |E|, respectively, and the degree of vertex v

is denoted as deg( v).

– Linear-time graph tasks are tasks that can be solved in time proportional to the size of the graph, typically O(n + m), or proportional to the size of a local neighborhood, such as O(deg( v)) . Solving these tasks requires LLMs to inspect vertices and edges or perform standard graph traversal. 

– Polynomial-time graph tasks are tasks that can be solved by algorithms whose running time is bounded by a polynomial function of the graph size, such as O(n2), O(n3), or O(m log n). These tasks usually require LLMs to execute multi-step logical deduction and track intermediate states. 

– NP-complete tasks represent a much higher level of computational difficulty, as no polynomial-time algorithms are known to exist for these problems. These tasks require LLMs to perform complex rea-soning and often demand abilities such as dynamic backtracking and systematic exploration of possi-ble solutions. 

## C Introduction of Benchmark Datasets 

In this section, we list benchmark datasets for LLMs for graph computations. Table 4 summa-rizes representative benchmark datasets that have been used to evaluate large language models for graph computation. The graph size column re-ports the approximate scale of graphs used in each dataset. The graph type column describes the structural or semantic properties of the graphs, such as whether they are directed, weighted, dy-namic, heterogeneous, or attributed. The graph source column reports whether the graphs are syn-thetic or derived from real-world data. The mean-ing of the abbreviations used in the graph type and graph source columns is given in Table 3. The task coverage columns indicate whether the dataset includes linear-time, polynomial-time, or NP-complete graph computation tasks. Finally, the number of tasks column reports the total number of graph computation tasks included in each dataset when available.            

> Table 3: Signs used in Table 4.
> Sign Meaning
> Network Format
> UUnipartite, undirected, and unweighted graph DDirected graph Dacyc Directed acyclic graph BBipartite graph
> +Weighted or capacitated graph TDynamic or temporal graph Het Heterogeneous graph Attr Attributed or text-attributed graph
> Graph Source
> RW Real-world graph Syn Synthetic graph

Table 4: Summary of benchmark datasets of large language models for graph computation. 

Name Graphs Tasks # of Tasks Size Type Source Linear Poly NP-Comp 

GPT4Graph (Guo et al., 2023) ∼ 10 1 U, D, Attr RW ✓ ✓ – 10 NLGraph (Wang et al., 2023a) ∼ 10 2 U, D, +, B, D acyc Syn ✓ ✓ ✓ 8LLMtoGraph Eval. (Liu and Wu, 2023) ∼ 10 2 U Syn ✓ ✓ – 5GraphQA (Fatemi et al., 2024) ∼ 10 1 U Syn ✓ – – 7GraphLLM Eval. (Chai et al., 2026) ∼ 10 2 U, B, Attr RW – ✓ – 4LLM4DyG (Zhang et al., 2024b) ∼ 10 1 T, U RW, Syn – ✓ – 9GVLQA / GITA (Wei et al., 2024) ∼ 10 1 U, D, +, B RW, Syn ✓ ✓ ✓ 7GraphWiz (Chen et al., 2024) ∼ 10 2 U, D, +, B Syn ✓ ✓ ✓ 9GraphInstruct (Luo et al., 2025) ∼ 10 2 U, D, +, B Syn ✓ ✓ ✓ 21 InstructGraph (Wang et al., 2024a) ∼ 10 2 U, D, +, Het, Attr RW, Syn ✓ ✓ ✓ 29 NLGIFT (Zhang et al., 2024a) ∼ 10 1 U, D, + Syn ✓ ✓ – 4ProGraph (Li et al., 2024a) ∼ 10 6 U, D, +, Attr RW ✓ ✓ – 3GraphArena (Tang et al., 2025) ∼ 10 2 U, + RW – ✓ ✓ 10 GraCoRe (Yuan et al., 2025a) ∼ 10 1 U, D, +, Het, Attr RW, Syn ✓ ✓ ✓ 19 Graph Pattern Comp. (Dai et al., 2025) ∼ 10 2 U, D, Attr RW, Syn – ✓ – 11 GCoder / GraphWild (Zhang et al., 2025b) ∼ 10 2 U, D, +, B RW, Syn ✓ ✓ ✓ 13 GraphSilo / GraphPRM (Peng et al., 2025) ∼ 10 2 U, D, + Syn ✓ ✓ ✓ 13 GTools (Wang et al., 2025) ∼ 10 2 U, D, + Syn ✓ ✓ – 20 G-REAL / MA-GTS (Yuan et al., 2025b) ∼ 10 1 U, + RW ✓ ✓ ✓ 4GraphPile (Zhang et al., 2025a) ∼ 10 2 U, D, +, B RW, Syn ✓ ✓ – 23 GraphAlgorithm (Hu et al., 2025) ∼ 10 3 U, D, + RW ✓ ✓ ✓ 239 GT Bench / GTA (Xu et al., 2025) ∼ 10 2 U, D, + Syn ✓ ✓ ✓ 44 GraphOmni (Xu et al., 2026) ∼ 10 1 U, B Syn ✓ ✓ – 6G1 / Erd˝ os (Guo et al., 2025) ∼ 10 2 U, D, + RW ✓ ✓ ✓ 50 VGCURE (Zhu et al., 2025) ∼ 10 1 U, D, Attr RW, Syn ✓ ✓ – 22 GraphSQA / GraphInsight (Cao et al., 2025) ∼ 10 2 U, D, + Syn ✓ – – 20 LLMTM (Hao et al., 2026) ∼ 10 2 T, U RW, Syn – ✓ – 6GRAlgoBench (Zhang et al., 2026) ∼ 10 2 U, + RW ✓ ✓ ✓ 9ComplexGraph / GraphSkill (Wang et al., 2026a) ∼ 10 4 U, D, D acyc , + Syn ✓ ✓ ✓ 23 Grena / GraphVista (Han et al., 2026) ∼ 10 3 U, + Syn ✓ ✓ ✓ 20 Graph4real / GraphCogent (Wang et al., 2026b) ∼ 10 3 U, D, +, Attr RW ✓ ✓ – 21 Less-is-More Graph Tasks (Shirai et al., 2025) ∼ 10 2 D, Attr Syn ✓ – – 8GraphThought Dataset (Huang et al., 2025) ∼ 10 2 U, +, Attr RW ✓ ✓ ✓ 10 NPG-Muse Corpus (Wang et al., 2026c) ∼ 10 1 U, +, Attr Syn – – ✓ 3TRF Preference Dataset (Wei et al., 2025) ∼ 10 1 U, D, +, B, D acyc Syn ✓ ✓ ✓ 7GTR Preference Dataset (Wei et al., 2026b) ∼ 10 1 U, D, +, B, D acyc Syn ✓ ✓ ✓ 7D Summary of the methods for LLMs-based graph computation 

Table 5 provides a comprehensive comparison of all methods reviewed in this survey. For each method, we indicate its publication venue, provide a sum-mary of the experimental performance reported in the original paper, and specify whether an official implementation is publicly available. For the exper-imental performance, we report both the maximum graph scale and accuracy. 

– This size column indicates the largest graph size used for graph computations as reported by each pa-per. The scale is calculated as round(log 10 nmax ),where nmax is the largest reported vertex count in graph computation tasks. 

– The accuracy columns summarize the reported performance of each method on three categories of graph computation tasks. These task categories fol-low the complexity-based grouping introduced in Appendix B. Since different studies employ vary-ing benchmarks and models, their reported raw accuracy is not directly comparable. To address this, we adopt a star-based rating to provide an overview of the reported effectiveness for each task category. Each ⋆ corresponds to 20% accuracy, with higher star ratings representing superior per-formance within the experimental setting of the respective paper. The symbol “–” means that the paper does not report results for that task category. 

– The code column provides links to the official implementation when available. Table 5: Summary of methods for LLM-based graph computation. 

Cat. Method Venue Size Accuracy Code 

Linear Poly NP-Complete Prompting NLGraph (Wang et al., 2023a) NeurIPS’23 10 2 ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ ✓

GPT4Graph (Guo et al., 2023) arXiv’23 10 1 ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ ⋆⋆ – –LLMtoGraph (Liu and Wu, 2023) arXiv’23 10 2 ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ – ✓

LLM4DyG (Zhang et al., 2024b) KDD’24 10 1 – ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ – ✓

GraphArena (Tang et al., 2025) ICLR’25 10 2 – ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ ⋆⋆ ✓

GraCoRe (Yuan et al., 2025a) COLING’25 10 1 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ ✓

GraphPattern (Dai et al., 2025) ICLR’25 10 2 – ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ – ✓

LLMTM (Hao et al., 2026) AAAI’26 10 2 – ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ – ✓

> Encoding

Talk Like a Graph (Fatemi et al., 2024) ICLR’24 10 1 ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ – – –GraphLLM (Chai et al., 2026) arXiv’23 10 2 – ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ – ✓

Graph-Token (Perozzi et al., 2024) arXiv’24 10 1 ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ – –GraphDO (Ge et al., 2025) ACL’25 10 1 ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ✓

GraphOmni (Xu et al., 2026) ICLR’26 10 1 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ – ✓

GraphInsight (Cao et al., 2025) ACL’25 10 2 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ – – –Graph Lineariz. (Xypolopoulos et al., 2025) arXiv’24 10 2 ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ – –CL-OWL (Zangari et al., 2026) arXiv’26 10 2 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ – ✓

DynamicTRF (Wei et al., 2025) arXiv’25 10 1 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ –DynamicGTR (Wei et al., 2026b) CVPR’26 10 1 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ –Post-training GraphWiz (Chen et al., 2024) KDD’24 10 2 ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ ✓

GITA (Wei et al., 2024) NeurIPS’24 10 1 ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ ✓

InstructGraph (Wang et al., 2024a) ACL Findings’24 10 2 ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ ⋆⋆ ✓

GraphInstruct (Luo et al., 2025) arXiv’24 10 2 ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ✓

NLGift (Zhang et al., 2024a) EMNLP Findings’24 10 1 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ – ✓

HLM-G (Khurana et al., 2024) arXiv’24 10 2 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ – –GraphPRM (Peng et al., 2025) KDD’25 10 2 ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ✓

G1 (Guo et al., 2025) arXiv’25 10 2 ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ ⋆⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ ✓

Post-training Alignment (Zhang et al., 2025c) arXiv’25 10 1 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ – ✓

GraphThought (Huang et al., 2025) arXiv’25 10 2 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ✓

Less is More (Shirai et al., 2025) arXiv’25 10 2 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ – – –NPG-Muse (Wang et al., 2026c) arXiv’25 10 1 – – ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ✓

> Code generation

GraphArena (Tang et al., 2025) ICLR’25 10 2 – ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ ✓

GCoder (Zhang et al., 2025b) CIKM’25 10 6 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ✓

GRRAF (Li et al., 2025) EMNLP Findings’25 10 4 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ✓

PIE (Gong et al., 2025) arXiv’25 10 2 – ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ –GraphMind (Zhang et al., 2025a) COLM’25 10 2 ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ ⋆ – –Simple-RTC (Hu et al., 2025) arXiv’25 10 3 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ –GraphSkill (Wang et al., 2026a) arXiv’26 10 4 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ✓

> Function calling

Graph-ToolFormer (Zhang, 2023) arXiv’23 10 1 ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ ✓

Graph-CoT (Jin et al., 2024b) ACL Findings’24 10 8 – – – ✓

LLM4Graph (Li et al., 2024a) NeurIPS’24 10 6 ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ – ✓

Graph-Grounded LLMs (Gupta et al., 2025) arXiv’25 10 2 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ –GraphChain (Wei et al., 2026a) NeurIPS’25 10 5 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ – ✓

GraphTool-Instruction (Wang et al., 2025) KDD’25 10 2 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ – ✓

EGL-SCA (Yuan et al., 2026) arXiv’26 10 1 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ –Multi-agent collaboration  GraphTeam (Li et al., 2024b) arXiv’24 10 6 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ✓

GraphAgent-Reasoner (Hu et al., 2024) arXiv’24 10 3 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ – –MA-GTS (Yuan et al., 2025b) EMNLP’25 10 2 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ✓

GTA (Xu et al., 2025) arXiv’25 10 2 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ –GraphDC (Li and Cui, 2026) arXiv’26 10 2 ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆⋆ – ✓

GraphVista (Han et al., 2026) arXiv’25 10 3 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ –GraphCogent (Wang et al., 2026b) WWW’26 10 4 ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ – –

–: Not reported / not evaluated ✓: Code available ⋆: Average accuracy of this task category (1 to 5) 

Size is 10 round(log 10 nmax ), with .5 rounded up. Here nmax denotes the largest reported graph-computation vertex count.