Title: From Causal Discovery to Dynamic Causal Inference in Neural Time Series

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.20980v1

Published Time: Tue, 24 Mar 2026 01:00:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# From Causal Discovery to Dynamic Causal Inference in Neural Time Series 

# Dmitry Zaytsev 

Lucy Family Institute for Data & Society University of Notre Dame Notre Dame, Indiana, USA dzaytsev@nd.edu 

# Valentina V. Kuskova 

Lucy Family Institute for Data & Society University of Notre Dame Notre Dame, Indiana, USA vkuskova@nd.edu 

# Michael Coppedge 

Department of Political Science University of Notre Dame Notre Dame, Indiana, USA mcoppedg@nd.edu 

## Abstract 

Time-varying causal models provide a powerful framework for studying dynamic scientific systems, yet most existing approaches assume that the underlying causal network is known a priori - an assumption rarely satisfied in real-world domains where causal structure is uncertain, evolving, or only indirectly observable. This limits the applicability of dynamic causal inference in many scien-tific settings. We propose Dynamic Causal Network Autoregres-sion (DCNAR), a two-stage neural causal modeling framework that integrates data-driven causal discovery with time-varying causal inference. In the first stage, a neural autoregressive causal discovery model learns a sparse directed causal network from multivariate time series. In the second stage, this learned structure is used as a structural prior for a time-varying neural network autoregression, enabling dynamic estimation of causal influence without requiring pre-specified network structure. We evaluate the scientific validity of DCNAR using behavioral diagnostics that assess causal necessity, temporal stability, and sensitivity to structural change, rather than predictive accuracy alone. Experiments on multi-country panel time-series data demonstrate that learned causal networks yield more stable and behaviorally meaningful dynamic causal inferences than coefficient-based or structure-free alternatives, even when forecasting performance is comparable. These results position DC-NAR as a general framework for using AI as a scientific instrument for dynamic causal reasoning under structural uncertainty. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Computing methodologies → Causal reasoning and diag-nostics ; Time series analysis ; Machine learning .

## Keywords 

Dynamic causal inference, Time-varying autoregression, Impulse response analysis, Counterfactual simulation, Structural priors 

ACM Reference Format: 

Dmitry Zaytsev, Valentina V. Kuskova, and Michael Coppedge. 2026. From Causal Discovery to Dynamic Causal Inference in Neural Time Series. In  

> Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
> ,
> ©2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YYYY/MM https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn. nnnnnnn 

## 1 Introduction 

Scientific models are not evaluated solely by how accurately they predict future observations, but by what they reveal about the un-derlying processes that generate data. This distinction is especially important in the social sciences and economics, where researchers seek to model human systems as complex adaptive processes and to evaluate the dynamic consequences of policy-relevant interventions through counterfactual simulation rather than prediction alone. In such settings, predictive accuracy is a necessary condition for model credibility, but it is not sufficient for scientific explanation. Dynamic causal understanding therefore relies on forms of model interrogation that go beyond forecast performance [ 10 ]. Scientists examine impulse response functions [ 45 , 52 ] to study how shocks propagate over time, counterfactual trajectories [ 49 , 71 ] to assess the effects of alternative interventions, and the stability and per-sistence of causal effects across regimes [ 13 ]. These tools support explanation, hypothesis testing, and early warning in ways that aggregate error metrics cannot capture. Despite this, much of modern machine learning for time series prioritizes predictive performance [ 47 ]. Flexible neural models can achieve strong forecasting results [ 46 ] but often behave poorly under causal interrogation [ 42 ]. Impulse responses may exhibit oscillations or sign reversals [ 39 , 51 ], counterfactual trajectories may diverge unrealistically [ 69 ], and inferred dynamics can be highly sensitive to small perturbations [ 40 ]. Consequently, such models are difficult to use as scientific instruments, even when their predictive accuracy is competitive. Existing frameworks for dynamic causal inference face a comple-mentary limitation. Models that provide interpretable time-varying causal parameters, such as time-varying vector autoregressions or network autoregressive models, typically assume that the underly-ing causal structure is known in advance [ 22 ]. In many domains, including political systems [ 7], ecological networks [ 19 ], and social processes [ 55 ], this assumption is rarely satisfied. Causal structure is often uncertain, evolving, or itself the object of investigation. Researchers are therefore forced to choose between interpretable dynamic models with questionable structural assumptions and flex-ible predictive models that offer little causal insight [24, 58, 62]. This paper introduces Dynamic Causal Network Autoregression 

(DCNAR), a framework designed to bridge this divide. DCNAR en-ables dynamic causal analysis when causal structure is unknown by integrating data-driven causal discovery with time-varying network  

> arXiv:2603.20980v1 [cs.LG] 21 Mar 2026 , , Zaytsev et al.

autoregression in a principled pipeline. Rather than optimizing ex-clusively for predictive accuracy, DCNAR is designed to support scientifically meaningful interrogation through impulse responses and counterfactual analysis, accepting modest trade-offs in predic-tive optimality in exchange for greater interpretability, stability, and theoretical coherence of inferred causal dynamics. Our methodology is motivated by domain-specific democracy panel data characterized by many short, heterogeneous country-level time series, whose constraints directly inform the design of DCNAR and its emphasis on structural regularization. Using multi-country panel time-series data as a motivating scientific application, we show that DCNAR produces impulse responses and counterfac-tual trajectories that are stable, interpretable, and consistent with theoretical expectations, even when causal structure is not known a priori. While DCNAR does not dominate all baselines on every predictive metric, it remains competitively calibrated and avoids the pathological causal behavior often exhibited by purely predictive models. These properties make DCNAR suitable not merely as a forecasting tool, but as a methodological instrument for scientific reasoning about dynamic systems. The contributions of this work are twofold. First, we demonstrate that DCNAR achieves competitive predictive and distributional performance relative to common time-series baselines while main-taining probabilistic calibration. Second, and more importantly, we show that DCNAR uniquely supports interpretable, stable, and theoretically meaningful impulse-response and counterfactual anal-ysis in settings with unknown causal structure, enabling forms of dynamic causal understanding that are inaccessible to existing approaches. 

## 2 Scientific Challenge: Dynamic Causality Without Known Structure 

Many scientific domains seek to understand not only whether vari-ables are related, but how causal relationships evolve over time [67 ]. In complex systems [ 70 ] such as political regimes or social pro-cesses, causal influence is rarely static: interactions may strengthen, weaken, or reverse as contextual conditions change [ 2 ]. Captur-ing such temporal variation is therefore essential for scientific ex-planation, early warning, and counterfactual reasoning [ 24 , 36 ]. Time-varying causal models, including time-varying vector autore-gression [ 33 ] and network autoregression [ 3, 74 ], have been widely developed for this purpose [14]. Despite their conceptual appeal, the applicability of dynamic causal models is constrained by a central assumption: the underly-ing causal network is known in advance [ 20 , 22 , 57 ]. Most formula-tions require researchers to specify which directed interactions are admissible based on theory, expert knowledge, or prior empirical studies. In many scientific domains, however, causal structure is pre-cisely what is uncertain, contested, or under investigation [ 28 , 66 ]. As a result, researchers face a persistent trade-off between impos-ing potentially incorrect structural assumptions or abandoning explicit causal modeling in favor of flexible predictive approaches that sacrifice interpretability and hypothesis testing [1, 18]. At a deeper level, this trade-off reflects a structural rather than algorithmic limitation. Joint estimation of time-varying causal ef-fects and network structure is ill-posed in finite, high-dimensional time series, while unconstrained dynamic models are unstable and difficult to interpret. Existing approaches therefore stabilize estima-tion by fixing structure [ 8 ], typically treating causal discovery and dynamic inference as separate problems [ 30 ]. This separation trans-forms dynamic causal models into descriptive tools conditioned on assumed networks [ 27 ], limiting their use for evaluating or discov-ering causal hypotheses. The challenge addressed in this work is to overcome this limitation by treating causal structure not as a fixed prerequisite, but as a learned and empirically testable component of dynamic causal inference. 

## 3 Scientific Evidence in Dynamic Causal Models 

Dynamic causal models are often evaluated using predictive criteria such as forecast error or likelihood [ 56 ], but these metrics alone are insufficient for scientific inference. In practice, researchers assess causal models by how they behave under perturbation, examin-ing impulse responses, counterfactual trajectories [ 5, 34 ], and the stability of inferred relationships across contexts. Such behavioral probes reveal how effects propagate through a system over time and provide forms of evidence essential for explanation and hypothesis evaluation that cannot be reduced to predictive performance. 

## 3.1 Limits of prediction-centric evaluation 

Prediction-focused evaluation treats the data-generating process as a black box [ 48 ], emphasizing forecast accuracy [ 50 ] without regard to the mechanisms through which predictions are achieved. For causal analysis, this criterion is too weak [ 12 ]. Models with similar predictive accuracy may encode fundamentally different assumptions about feedback, temporal dependence, and causal path-ways, leading to divergent conclusions when used for explanation or intervention analysis [18, 35]. These limitations are especially pronounced for flexible machine learning models. Highly expressive architectures can interpolate observed data effectively [ 61 ], yet exhibit unstable or implausible behavior under causal interrogation [ 54 ]. Small perturbations may induce oscillatory impulse responses, sign reversals, or explosive counterfactual trajectories that are difficult to reconcile with do-main knowledge [ 59 , 65 ]. Consequently, predictive accuracy should be viewed as a necessary but not sufficient condition for scien-tific usefulness in dynamic causal modeling. Additional criteria are required to assess whether inferred dynamics are coherent, interpretable, and robust. Moreover, most evaluations of such models have been conducted in technical or engineered domains with controlled dynamics and abundant data [ 65 ]. In the social sciences, where systems are adap-tive, data are observational, and causal structure is uncertain, sys-tematic evidence on how flexible predictive models behave under causal interrogation remains limited [59]. 

## 3.2 Impulse responses and counterfactual behavior 

Impulse response functions are a foundational tool for dynamic causal analysis [ 63 ]. They characterize how localized shocks propa-gate through a system over time, revealing both the direction and From Causal Discovery to Dynamic Causal Inference in Neural Time Series , , 

persistence of causal influence. Importantly, impulse responses ex-pose temporal structure that is not visible in static summaries or aggregate performance metrics. From a scientific perspective, interpretable impulse responses ex-hibit recognizable qualitative properties [ 39 ]: effects evolve smoothly, decay or persist in ways consistent with known mechanisms, and maintain sign consistency unless substantive reversals are expected [ 64 ]. When impulse responses display erratic oscillations, abrupt sign changes, or sensitivity to minor perturbations, their scientific value is limited [ 64 ]. Evaluating impulse response behavior there-fore provides a direct test of whether a model encodes plausible mechanisms rather than merely fitting observed trajectories. Closely related are counterfactual trajectories, which trace sys-tem evolution under hypothetical interventions or shocks [ 34 ]. Whereas impulse responses focus on marginal effects, counterfac-tual analysis captures how perturbations propagate through the full system, potentially affecting many variables simultaneously [ 53 ]. For scientific reasoning, counterfactual trajectories should remain stable, bounded, and interpretable over time [ 72 ], reflecting whether effects amplify, dissipate, or reconfigure [ 73 ]. Counterfactual paths that exhibit implausible volatility or collapse indicate unreliable causal structure [ 29 ]. Because counterfactual behavior is not di-rectly constrained by observed outcomes, it constitutes a stringent test of a model’s internal coherence and causal plausibility. 

## 3.3 Stability as causal evidence 

A further dimension of scientific evidence concerns stability [ 68 ]. Causal conclusions should not hinge on idiosyncratic features of a particular sample, nor change dramatically under modest per-turbations of the data or model specification. In dynamic settings, instability may appear as large fluctuations in inferred effects across time, regimes, or small structural variations. Stability is therefore central to causal credibility [ 6]. Models that produce qualitatively consistent impulse responses and counterfac-tual trajectories across reasonable perturbations provide stronger evidence of underlying mechanisms than models whose behav-ior is highly sensitive. This notion of stability is behavioral rather than parametric and is distinct from classical statistical significance, which concerns sampling variability rather than robustness of dy-namic behavior [32]. 

## 3.4 Implications for model evaluation 

All these considerations suggest that evaluating dynamic causal models requires a broader evidentiary framework than prediction alone. Scientifically useful models should support coherent impulse responses, interpretable counterfactual trajectories, and stable be-havior under perturbation, while maintaining reasonable predictive performance [ 41 ]. No single metric captures these properties; in-stead, they must be assessed through targeted behavioral diagnos-tics that probe how models respond to interventions and structural variation. This perspective motivates the framework introduced in the following sections. Rather than treating prediction accuracy as the primary objective, we evaluate dynamic causal models based on the quality and stability of the causal behaviors they induce, allowing models to be assessed as instruments for scientific understanding rather than solely as forecasting tools. 

## 4 DCNAR: Learned Networks as Structural Priors for Dynamic Causal Modeling 4.1 Dynamic causality with unknown structure 

Let 

x𝑡 =  𝑥 1,𝑡 , . . . , 𝑥 𝑁 ,𝑡 

⊤ , 𝑡 = 1, . . . ,𝑇 , (1) denote an 𝑁 -dimensional multivariate time series [ 23 ]. Dynamic causal modeling aims to characterize how directed dependencies among variables evolve over time, rather than assuming static in-teractions. A general time-varying autoregressive representation [ 9] can be written as 

x𝑡 =

> 𝐿

∑︁ 

> ℓ=1

Aℓ (𝑡 ) x𝑡 −ℓ + 𝜺 𝑡 , (2) where Aℓ (𝑡 ) ∈ R𝑁 ×𝑁 encodes directed causal influence at lag ℓ

and time 𝑡 . Without additional constraints, estimating (2) is ill-posed in finite samples, particularly in short, heterogeneous, or nonstationary systems [37]. Most existing dynamic causal models address this by assuming that the support of Aℓ (𝑡 ) is known in advance via a fixed adjacency matrix [26] 

G ∈ { 0, 1}𝑁 ×𝑁 , (3) such that 

𝐴 ℓ,𝑖 𝑗 (𝑡 ) = 0 whenever 𝐺 𝑖 𝑗 = 0. (4) This assumption presumes that the causal network is known, fixed, and correct [ 57 ]. In many scientific domains, however, causal struc-ture is uncertain and itself a target of inquiry. DCNAR addresses this gap by replacing assumed structure with a learned and testable structural prior. 

## 4.2 Overview of the DCNAR framework 

Dynamic Causal Network Autoregression (DCNAR) is a two-stage framework that decouples causal structure discovery from dynamic causal estimation. Rather than jointly estimating a dense time-varying interaction tensor, DCNAR first infers a sparse directed network from data and then uses this network to constrain dy-namic inference. This design allows causal influence to vary over time while maintaining interpretability and stability, and it enables impulse-response and counterfactual analysis under structural un-certainty. 

## 4.3 Stage I: Neural autoregressive causal network discovery 

In the first stage, DCNAR infers a candidate causal network using a neural additive autoregressive causal discovery model [ 11 ]. For each target variable 𝑥 𝑖,𝑡 , the model takes the form 

𝑥 𝑖,𝑡 =

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1
> 𝐿

∑︁ 

> ℓ=1

𝑓 𝑖 𝑗ℓ 

 𝑥 𝑗,𝑡 −ℓ

 + 𝜀 𝑖,𝑡 , (5) where 𝑓 𝑖 𝑗ℓ (·) are univariate neural functions. The additive structure ensures that contributions from individual lagged variables are separable and interpretable. , , Zaytsev et al. 

Sparsity is induced through regularization on the collection 

{𝑓 𝑖 𝑗ℓ }. Directed influence from variable 𝑗 to 𝑖 is summarized via an aggregated causal score 

𝑆 𝑖 𝑗 =

> 𝐿

∑︁ 

> ℓ=1

𝑓 𝑖 𝑗ℓ , (6) yielding a matrix S ∈ R𝑁 ×𝑁 of directed causal scores. The causal score matrix does not represent regression coefficients or estimands with known sampling distributions. It is a sparse, directed Granger-causal network learned from multivariate time series, capturing predictive dependencies across variables rather than identified structural causal effects [ 11 ]. In DCNAR, it is treated as a structural hypothesis rather than as a final inferential object. In practice, additional processing steps may be applied to S, in-cluding stability assessment and necessity-based screening, to con-struct a sparse adjacency matrix. In the experiments reported here, we use a weighted adjacency matrix obtained via edge ablation, which retains only those directed relationships whose removal de-grades out-of-sample performance, thereby prioritizing structurally necessary interactions. The general framework for constructing and validating such restricted causal matrices is developed in detail in [43] and presented in the Appendix. The defining methodological innovation of DCNAR is the inter-pretation of the learned network as a structural prior . Let 

bG ∈ { 0, 1}𝑁 ×𝑁 (7) denote a directed adjacency matrix derived from the causal discov-ery stage. Rather than being assumed correct, bG specifies which interactions are admissible in the dynamic model. Formally, DCNAR constrains (2) by enforcing 

𝐴 ℓ,𝑖 𝑗 (𝑡 ) = 0 if b𝐺 𝑖 𝑗 = 0, (8) while allowing unrestricted time variation for admissible edges. This restriction reduces dimensionality, stabilizes estimation, and ensures that inferred dynamics correspond to explicit causal hy-potheses derived from data. Because the structure is learned rather than imposed, its validity can be assessed indirectly through down-stream dynamic behavior. In this sense, DCNAR treats causal struc-ture as a falsifiable component of inference. In related work, we further develop this idea by imposing additional, empirically moti-vated restrictions on the learned causal matrix, such as stability- and necessity-based filtering, to evaluate which edges are substantively reliable rather than merely predictive [43]. 

## 4.4 Alternative Ways to Provide Structure for Dynamic Causal Modeling 

Dynamic causal models such as time-varying network autoregres-sions require structural constraints to be identifiable and inter-pretable. When the underlying causal network is unknown, how-ever, there are multiple plausible ways to supply such structure. In this section, we formalize and contrast alternative strategies for providing structure to dynamic causal models, and clarify how DCNAR differs from, and improves upon, these approaches. Impor-tantly, the goal of this comparison is not to benchmark predictive models, but to evaluate which sources of structure are scientifically defensible foundations for dynamic causal inference. 

4.4.1 Coefficient-Based Structure from Linear VAR Models. A com-mon approach to inferring structure in multivariate time series is to estimate a linear vector autoregressive (VAR) model with regu-larization [4]. In its general form, a VAR( 𝐿 ) model is written as 

x𝑡 =

> 𝐿

∑︁ 

> ℓ=1

Bℓ x𝑡 −ℓ + 𝜺 𝑡 , (9) where Bℓ ∈ R𝑁 ×𝑁 are lag-specific coefficient matrices. In practice, regularization is used to stabilize estimation in high-dimensional or short-sample settings. Ridge VAR applies ℓ2 regu-larization to shrink coefficient magnitudes uniformly, while sparse VAR variants employ ℓ1 or elastic net penalties to encourage spar-sity. Structural information is then often derived by thresholding estimated coefficients, yielding an adjacency matrix of the form 

𝐺 VAR  

> 𝑖 𝑗

= I

> 𝐿

∑︁ 

> ℓ=1

|𝐵 ℓ,𝑖 𝑗 | > 𝜏 

!

, (10) where 𝜏 is a fixed threshold. Time-varying VAR (TV-VAR) models extend this framework by allowing coefficients to evolve smoothly over time, 

x𝑡 = B(𝑡 ) x𝑡 −1 + 𝜺 𝑡 , (11) typically estimated using kernel smoothing or state-space formula-tions. In these models, dynamic dependence is captured through time-varying coefficients, but structural interpretation still relies on the magnitudes of B(𝑡 ) or their time averages. While coefficient-based VAR models offer simplicity and inter-pretability, they exhibit important limitations as sources of struc-ture for dynamic causal modeling. First, even in TV-VAR formu-lations, structural interpretation remains tied to coefficient mag-nitude, which conflates direct and indirect effects and is sensitive to scaling and regularization. Second, in short or collinear time series, coefficient estimates, whether static or time-varying, can be unstable, leading to dense or highly variable inferred networks [ 60 ]. Finally, linear VAR-based structure reflects average linear depen-dence rather than causal influence in nonlinear or adaptive systems. As a result, although Ridge VAR and TV-VAR provide useful fore-casting baselines and contextual comparators, coefficient-derived structure is poorly suited to serve as a stable structural prior for time-varying causal inference in complex systems. 

4.4.2 Implicit Structure in Black-Box Predictive Models. An alter-native strategy is to abandon explicit network structure altogether and rely on flexible black-box models, such as recurrent neural networks or long short-term memory (LSTM) architectures [ 44 ]. These models can be written abstractly as 

x𝑡 = F ( x𝑡 −1, . . . , x𝑡 −𝐿 ) + 𝜺 𝑡 , (12) where F (·) is a high-capacity nonlinear function. Such models often achieve strong predictive performance [ 31 ]and are effective at capturing complex temporal dependencies. How-ever, they do not produce an explicit causal object corresponding to a directed network or time-varying causal influence [ 38 ]. As a result, they cannot support dynamic causal interpretation, struc-tural validation, or hypothesis testing at the level of individual relationships. From the perspective of dynamic causal modeling, From Causal Discovery to Dynamic Causal Inference in Neural Time Series , , 

implicit-structure models may therefore fail to provide the mini-mal representational requirements needed for scientific inference, regardless of their forecasting accuracy. 

4.4.3 Static Assumed Networks. A third approach is to impose a fixed network structure derived from theory, prior studies, or expert knowledge [ 7]. In this case, the adjacency matrix G is specified exogenously and held constant throughout estimation. While this strategy can be appropriate in domains with well-established causal mechanisms, it is problematic in many scientific contexts where causal relationships are uncertain, contested, or context-dependent [ 25 ]. Moreover, static assumed networks pre-clude the possibility of discovering previously unknown relation-ships and cannot adapt to structural change over time [ 15 ]. Con-sequently, this approach risks hard-coding potentially incorrect assumptions into dynamic models, undermining both interpretabil-ity and scientific validity. 

4.4.4 Learned Explicit Structure via DCNAR. DCNAR occupies a distinct position among these alternatives by providing an explicit, data-driven causal structure that is neither assumed nor implicit. By learning a sparse directed network using NAVAR and treating it as a structural prior for time-varying modeling, DCNAR combines the interpretability of explicit networks with the flexibility of data-driven discovery. Unlike coefficient-based approaches, the learned structure in DCNAR is nonlinear, lag-aware, and explicitly optimized for causal attribution rather than for linear approximation. Unlike black-box predictive models, DCNAR produces a concrete causal object that can be interrogated, ablated, and validated. Unlike assumed net-works, the structure is inferred from data and subjected to empirical testing rather than imposed a priori. This comparison clarifies that the central contribution of DC-NAR is not a particular modeling choice, but a principled solution to the problem of supplying scientifically meaningful structure to dynamic causal models when such structure is unknown. By framing structure as a learned and testable prior, DCNAR enables dynamic causal inference in settings where existing approaches either assume away uncertainty or abandon causal interpretability altogether. 

## 4.5 Stage II: Time-varying network autoregression 

Conditioned on the learned structural prior bG, DCNAR estimates dynamic causal influence using a time-varying network autoregres-sive model. The baseline formulation follows the tvNAR framework [22 ], in which time variation enters through node-specific influence parameters while network structure is treated as fixed. In the tvNAR(1) specification, the model is given by 

x𝑡 = (bG + I) 𝚲 (𝑡 ) x𝑡 −1 + 𝜺 𝑡 , (13) where bG ∈ R𝑁 ×𝑁 is the directed adjacency matrix supplied by the causal discovery stage, I is the identity matrix, and 

𝚲 (𝑡 ) = diag (𝜆 1 (𝑡 ), . . . , 𝜆 𝑁 (𝑡 )) 

contains node-specific, smoothly varying influence parameters. We extend the original tvNAR formulation by allowing for higher-order autoregressive dynamics. Specifically, DCNAR supports a tvNAR( 𝑝 ) model of the form 

x𝑡 =

> 𝑝

∑︁ 

> ℓ=1

(bG + I) 𝚲 ℓ (𝑡 ) x𝑡 −ℓ + 𝜺 𝑡 , (14) where each 𝚲 ℓ (𝑡 ) is a diagonal matrix of time-varying node in-fluence parameters associated with lag ℓ. The tvNAR(1) model in Equation (13) is recovered as a special case when 𝑝 = 1.Time variation in 𝚲 ℓ (𝑡 ) is estimated via kernel-based local smooth-ing over a normalized time index [ 22 ]. In the experiments reported in this paper, we use the tvNAR(1) specification for clarity and stability; exploration of higher-order dynamics is deferred to sup-plementary analyses. 

## 4.6 Impulse responses and counterfactual trajectories 

The central methodological outputs of DCNAR are impulse-response functions (IRFs) and counterfactual trajectories derived from the time-varying, structurally constrained dynamics defined above. These objects form the primary basis for scientific interpretation and model comparison in this work. 

Time-varying impulse response functions. Consider the tvNAR( 𝑝 )model in Equation (14). Let 

Aℓ (𝑡 ) = (bG + I) 𝚲 ℓ (𝑡 ), (15) and define the state-space representation 

x𝑡 =

> 𝑝

∑︁ 

> ℓ=1

Aℓ (𝑡 ) x𝑡 −ℓ + 𝜺 𝑡 . (16) For a given time index 𝑡 0, the local impulse response of variable 𝑖 

to a unit shock in variable 𝑗 at horizon ℎ is defined recursively as 

𝚿 𝑡 0 (0) = I, 𝚿 𝑡 0 (ℎ) =

> 𝑝

∑︁ 

> ℓ=1

Aℓ (𝑡 0 + ℎ) 𝚿 𝑡 0 (ℎ − ℓ), ℎ ≥ 1, (17) with 𝚿 𝑡 0 (ℎ) = 0 for ℎ < 0.The (𝑖, 𝑗 ) entry of 𝚿 𝑡 0 (ℎ),

IRF 𝑖 ←𝑗 (𝑡 0, ℎ ) = 𝚿 𝑡 0 (ℎ) 

> 𝑖 𝑗

, (18) quantifies the effect at horizon ℎ of a one-unit shock to variable 𝑗 

at time 𝑡 0 on variable 𝑖 , conditional on the learned structural prior 

bG.Because Aℓ (𝑡 ) varies smoothly with time, impulse responses are themselves time-indexed objects, allowing causal propagation to differ across regimes. This distinguishes DCNAR from static VAR-based IRFs, which average causal behavior across the entire sample. 

Structural role of learned networks. The learned adjacency matrix 

bG enters the impulse-response computation through the support of Aℓ (𝑡 ). If b𝐺 𝑖 𝑗 = 0, then IRF 𝑖 ←𝑗 (𝑡 0, ℎ ) = 0 for all ℎ unless mediated indirectly through other admissible paths. As a result, impulse responses reflect explicit causal hypotheses encoded by the learned structure, rather than dense or implicit interactions. This structural constraint is critical for interpretability. Without it, unconstrained time-varying models often produce oscillatory or unstable impulse responses that are difficult to reconcile with scientific theory. , , Zaytsev et al. 

Counterfactual trajectories. Impulse responses characterize mar-ginal effects of localized shocks. To examine system-level behavior under sustained or composite interventions, we compute counter-factual trajectories. Let x(0) 

> 𝑡

denote the observed trajectory generated by the fitted model, and let x(𝛿 ) 

> 𝑡

denote the counterfactual trajectory under an intervention 𝜹 𝑡 . The counterfactual dynamics are defined by 

x(𝛿 ) 

> 𝑡

=

> 𝑝

∑︁ 

> ℓ=1

Aℓ (𝑡 ) x(𝛿 )  

> 𝑡 −ℓ

+ 𝜹 𝑡 , (19) with 𝜹 𝑡 encoding the magnitude, timing, and target of the interven-tion. 

System-level response measures. To summarize system-wide de-viation under counterfactual scenarios, we define the aggregated response magnitude 

R ( 𝑡 ) = x(𝛿 ) 

> 𝑡

− x(0)  

> 𝑡 2

, (20) which captures the overall divergence between factual and coun-terfactual system trajectories. This quantity allows direct comparison of dynamic behavior across models and across intervention types. In particular, mod-els that produce unstable or incoherent dynamics tend to exhibit erratic or explosive R ( 𝑡 ) paths, whereas DCNAR yields smooth, interpretable responses aligned with domain expectations. 

Normalization and country-specific impulse responses. To facili-tate comparison of counterfactual dynamics across countries with different baseline levels and scales, we additionally examine nor-malized system-level responses. Specifically, for each country 𝑐 , we compute the 𝐿 2 normalization of the system state and normalize counterfactual deviations relative to the country-specific baseline trajectory. This normalization allows system-level responses to be interpreted as proportional deviations rather than absolute level changes, mitigating scale effects across panels. In addition to system-level summaries, DCNAR supports impulse-response analysis at the level of individual variables within each country. For a fixed country 𝑐 , impulse responses IRF (𝑐 ) 

> 𝑖 ←𝑗

(𝑡 0, ℎ ) are computed using the country-specific time-varying coefficient paths 

A(𝑐 ) 

> ℓ

(𝑡 ), allowing heterogeneous dynamic responses to be examined across institutional components and across countries. This enables direct inspection of how shocks to a specific variable propagate through the system in different national contexts, complementing the aggregated 𝐿 2 analysis shown in Figure 2. 

Interpretation. Because impulse responses and counterfactual trajectories are computed conditional on a learned but explicit structural prior, their qualitative behavior provides evidence about the scientific plausibility of both the inferred structure and the dynamic model. In experiments, we use these objects, not forecast accuracy alone, as the primary basis for comparing DCNAR to alternative approaches. 

## 5 Experiments 5.1 Data characteristics and empirical challenge 

Our empirical evaluation is designed to reflect the conditions under which dynamic causal inference is most difficult in practice: many panels with short time series. The primary dataset consists of an-nual country–year observations from the Varieties of Democracy (V-Dem) project [ 17 ], restricted to a modern window in which in-stitutional indicators are most comparable across countries. The resulting panel contains a large number of countries (139) observed over a relatively short temporal horizon (35 years each). This data regime poses a particular challenge for dynamic causal modeling. Short time series limit the feasibility of estimating richly parameterized time-varying models, while heterogeneity across panels makes it difficult to pool information without imposing strong structural assumptions. At the same time, the substantive questions motivating this study, such as how democratic compo-nents influence one another over time, and how shocks propagate through institutional systemsm, are inherently dynamic and causal in nature. The experimental setting therefore reflects a realistic and demanding use case rather than a favorable synthetic benchmark. To assess robustness to temporal support, we additionally eval-uate DCNAR on an extended panel from the same dataset with substantially longer time series but fewer countries (89 countries over 75 years). Results from this longer panel are reported in the appendix. As discussed below, the qualitative behavior of DCNAR is consistent across the two settings, providing evidence that its dynamic causal conclusions are not an artifact of a particular panel configuration. 

## 5.2 Predictive and distributional performance 

We begin by comparing DCNAR to standard baselines using con-ventional predictive and distributional diagnostics, described in detail in the Appendix, relative to Ridge VAR, TV-VAR, and LSTM (with Monte Carlo dropout). Figure 1 summarizes results across multi-horizon predictive distribution accuracy (CRPS), local one-step distributional accuracy, empirical coverage of nominal 90% prediction intervals, and a representative counterfactual impulse response. Panels (A) and (B) show that DCNAR achieves predictive dis-tribution accuracy comparable to Ridge VAR and TV-VAR across forecast horizons, and consistently outperforms the LSTM base-line. While DCNAR does not uniformly dominate all competitors on CRPS, differences across models are modest. Panel (C) further shows that DCNAR maintains stable, near-nominal coverage of 90% prediction intervals across horizons, indicating that its struc-tural constraints do not compromise basic probabilistic calibration. By contrast, the LSTM baseline exhibits substantial undercover-age, reflecting miscalibrated uncertainty despite competitive point forecasts in some regimes. These results establish that DCNAR satisfies a minimum credibil-ity criterion: it is not meaningfully worse than established baselines on standard predictive and distributional metrics. This validation is necessary to ground subsequent causal analysis, but it is not the primary objective of the framework. 

5.2.1 Impulse responses and counterfactual dynamics. The central contribution of DCNAR lies in the qualitative behavior of its im-pulse responses and counterfactual trajectories. Panel (D) of Figure 1 illustrates a representative counterfactual impulse response for an expample country of Albania following a positive shock to freedom From Causal Discovery to Dynamic Causal Inference in Neural Time Series , , 

Figure 1: Comparison of DCNAR with Ridge VAR, TV-VAR, and LSTM (MC Dropout) across predictive (panel A, CRPS), distributional (panel B, local distributional accuracy - mean one-step-ahead CRPS), and causal diagnostics (panel C, nom-inal 90% prediction intervals across horizons) on the short-panel democracy dataset. Panel D shows representative coun-terfactual impulse response following a positive shock to freedom of expression (Albania). 

of expression. DCNAR produces a smooth, monotonic decay pat-tern consistent with theoretical expectations, whereas TV-VAR and LSTM exhibit oscillations and sign reversals, and the Ridge response is erratic and difficult to interpret. Similar qualitative differences are observed across countries and variables. Figure 2 extends this analysis to system-level counterfactual dy-namics, summarized using the 𝐿 2 normalization across all democ-racy components for multiple countries. Solid lines show trajecto-ries under a localized shock to freedom of expression, while dashed lines represent baseline evolution. The divergence between these trajectories captures the extent to which damage to a single demo-cratic component propagates through the broader institutional system. The resulting patterns reveal meaningful cross-country hetero-geneity that aligns with existing political science theory [ 16 ]. Estab-lished democracies (such the United States and the United Kingdom) exhibit relatively limited spillover effects, consistent with institu-tional resilience. Authoritarian regimes likewise display muted responses, as democratic components are already weak. In con-trast, hybrid regimes and newer democracies (e.g., Albania and Mexico) show substantially stronger propagation of shocks, with cascading declines across democratic components. These patterns are intended as illustrative and hypothesis-generating, rather than definitive causal claims. Importantly, DCNAR’s counterfactual trajectories remain smooth, bounded, and interpretable across cases. This behavior contrasts sharply with unconstrained or weakly constrained models, which often produce unstable or implausible system-level responses under the same perturbations. The coherence of DCNAR’s counterfactual dynamics indicates that the learned network operates effectively 

Figure 2: System-level counterfactual trajectories under DC-NAR, summarized by the 𝐿 2 normalization across all democ-racy components, for Albania, the United States, and Mex-ico. Solid lines denote trajectories under a localized positive shock to freedom of expression at horizon ℎ = 1; dashed lines denote corresponding baseline trajectories without interven-tion. 

as a structural prior, constraining dynamic inference in a way that supports causal interpretation. 

5.2.2 Stability across panel configurations. The qualitative patterns described above persist when DCNAR is applied to an extended panel with substantially longer time series. Despite differences in temporal support and sample composition, impulse responses and system-level counterfactual trajectories remain smooth, sign-consistent, and bounded. This robustness supports the interpreta-tion that DCNAR captures persistent features of the underlying causal system rather than exploiting idiosyncrasies of a particular dataset. Results for the extended panel are reported in the Appendix. 

## 5.3 Summary of experimental findings 

The experimental results support two main conclusions. First, DC-NAR meets standard predictive and distributional benchmarks, ensuring that its causal outputs are grounded in models with rea-sonable empirical fit. Second, and more importantly, DCNAR en-ables forms of dynamic causal analysis that are not supported by existing approaches. Its impulse responses and counterfactual tra-jectories are stable, interpretable, and theoretically meaningful, even in short-panel settings where dynamic causal inference is typ-ically unreliable. These findings reinforce the central claim of this study: in dynamic causal modeling, scientific value is determined not by marginal improvements in predictive accuracy, but by the coherence, stability, and interpretability of causal behavior under interrogation. DCNAR is explicitly designed to satisfy this criterion. 

## 6 DCNAR and the Data-Generating Process 

From the perspective of social sciences and economics, DCNAR en-ables analysis of human systems as complex adaptive processes in which institutional components respond endogenously to shocks and policy-relevant interventions propagate dynamically rather than instantaneously. Its primary contribution lies not in marginal , , Zaytsev et al. 

improvements in predictive accuracy, but in the forms of scientific reasoning it enables. By producing stable and interpretable impulse responses and counterfactual trajectories under structural uncer-tainty, DCNAR provides direct access to features of the underlying data-generating process that are difficult to examine with existing approaches. 

## 6.1 Persistence and transience of institutional shocks 

Across countries and democracy components, DCNAR distinguishes between shocks with persistent effects and those that dissipate rapidly. Impulse responses typically exhibit an immediate impact followed by gradual decay, consistent with mechanisms of institu-tional adjustment rather than explosive feedback or instantaneous reversion. This behavior aligns with theoretical accounts of demo-cratic change that emphasize inertia and gradual adaptation. Importantly, these distinctions emerge from the qualitative form of impulse responses rather than from coefficient magnitudes or static correlations. Models that produce oscillatory or unstable responses obscure persistence and transience, limiting their useful-ness for substantive interpretation. 

6.1.1 Structural asymmetries across countries. System-level coun-terfactual trajectories reveal meaningful cross-country heterogene-ity. While the overall pattern of shock propagation is similar, where smooth divergence is followed by stabilization, the magnitude and duration of responses vary across cases. Because DCNAR condi-tions dynamic inference on a learned but explicit causal structure, such heterogeneity can be interpreted as reflecting differences in institutional configuration and historical context rather than noise or model instability. In contrast, structure-free or black-box mod-els provide little basis for attributing cross-country variation in dynamic behavior to substantive institutional features. 

6.1.2 Stability of inferred mechanisms. A central finding is the stability of DCNAR’s dynamic causal behavior across panel con-figurations. Despite substantial differences in temporal support between the 35-year and 75-year panels, impulse responses and counterfactual trajectories remain qualitatively consistent. This robustness suggests that DCNAR captures persistent features of the underlying causal system rather than exploiting idiosyncrasies of a particular observation window. From a scientific perspective, such stability is essential: models whose causal conclusions change markedly under modest shifts in temporal support offer limited epistemic value. DCNAR’s abil-ity to produce coherent dynamics across data regimes supports its use as a tool for investigating underlying mechanisms rather than merely summarizing observed patterns. While necessarily exploratory, these results demonstrate that DCNAR enables inter-pretive access to dynamic causal processes—how systems respond to perturbation, how effects propagate over time, and how struc-tural differences shape outcomes—that are difficult or impossible to obtain with existing approaches. 

## 7 Limitations and Scope 

While DCNAR expands the scope of dynamic causal analysis under structural uncertainty, its conclusions should be interpreted within clear bounds. First, DCNAR depends on the quality of the causal discovery stage. Although the framework treats learned structure as a testable prior rather than as ground truth, poor or unstable discovery can still constrain downstream inference. Ongoing work addresses this issue through stability and necessity diagnostics, but discovery quality remains a fundamental input. For example, we do not claim that the estimates the model currently displays are fully meaningful. They display the results of a DCNAR model run on 16 democracy indicators from the V-Dem database and no exogeneous variables. Future work exploring complex democratic systems could focus on analyzing a much larger dataset using the DCNAR approach. Second, finite-sample limitations remain important, particularly in short-panel settings. While the structural prior stabilizes dynamic estimation, time-varying causal inference is inherently data-hungry, and very short or noisy series may still limit resolution of fine-grained temporal dynamics. Third, DCNAR does not claim to recover true structural causality in the sense of fully identified structural causal models. The causal relationships inferred here are Granger-causal, empirical and be-havioral, grounded in predictive dependence and dynamic response rather than in controlled intervention. The framework is intended to support scientific exploration and hypothesis evaluation, not definitive causal identification. These limitations reflect deliberate design choices. DCNAR prior-itizes interpretability, stability, and falsifiability over strong identifi-cation claims, aligning it with the norms of observational scientific research in complex systems. 

## 8 Conclusion 

This paper introduced DCNAR as a framework for dynamic causal analysis when causal structure is unknown. By integrating causal discovery with time-varying network autoregression through learned structural priors, DCNAR enables forms of reasoning that are largely inaccessible to existing models. Our results show that DCNAR matches standard baselines on predictive and distributional metrics while delivering qualitatively different, and scientifically more useful, causal behavior. Its impulse responses and counterfactual trajectories are stable, interpretable, and consistent with theoretical expectations, even in short-panel settings where dynamic causal inference is typically unreliable. The broader implication is methodological. In scientific appli-cations, the value of AI models lies not only in prediction, but in their ability to behave as instruments for understanding - to expose mechanisms, test hypotheses, and support counterfactual reasoning. DCNAR represents a step in this direction by reframing dynamic causal modeling around interpretable behavior under perturbation rather than around accuracy alone. More generally, this work argues for a shift in how dynamic causal models are evaluated in complex systems context. Models should be judged by the coherence and stability of the causal sto-ries they enable, not solely by their ability to forecast. DCNAR provides one concrete instantiation of this principle, and we hope it encourages further development of AI systems designed explicitly for scientific inquiry. From Causal Discovery to Dynamic Causal Inference in Neural Time Series , , 

## Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by funding from three research institutes at the University of Notre Dame: the Kellogg Institute for Interna-tional Studies, the Franco Family Institute for Liberal Arts and the Public Good, and the Lucy Family Institute for Data & Society. 

Generative AI Disclosure. Generative AI software (ChatGPT) was used to edit and improve the quality of author-written text. 

## References 

[1] S. F. Ackley, J. Lessler, and M. M. Glymour. 2022. Dynamical modeling as a tool for inferring causation. American journal of epidemiology 191, 1 (2022), 1–6. [2] U. Andersson, A. Cuervo-Cazurra, and B. B. Nielsen. 2019. Explaining interaction effects within and across levels of analysis. In Research methods in international businesss . Cham: Springer International Publishing, 331–349. [3] M. Armillotta and K. Fokianos. 2023. The Annals of Statistic. Multivariate behavioral research 51, 5 (2023), 2526–2552. [4] G. Ballarin. 2025. Ridge regularized estimation of VAR models for inference. 

Journal of Time Series Analysis 46, 2 (2025), 235–257. [5] M. Benhamza, M. Clausel, and M. Tami. 2025. Counterfactual Robustness: A Framework to Analyze the Robustness of Causal Generative Models Across Interventions. In In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases . Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, 391–408. [6] A. Bergh and P. C. Wichardt. 2024. On credibility and causality in economics: A critical appraisal. IFN Working Paper . Manuscript submitted for review. [7] M. Blackwell. 2013. A framework for dynamic causal inference in political science. 

American Journal of Political Science 57, 2 (2013), 504–520. [8] S. Bongers, T. Blom, and J. M. Mooij. 2018. Causal modeling of dynamical systems .arXiv:1803.08784 [cs.DL] [9] L. F. Bringmann, E. L. Hamaker, and D. E. et.al. Vigo. 2017. Changing dynam-ics: Time-varying autoregressive models using generalized additive modeling. 

Psychological methods 22, 3 (2017), 409. [10] M. J. Buehner. 2012. Understanding the past, predicting the future: Causation, not intentional action, is the root of temporal binding. Psychological science 23, 12 (2012), 1490–1497. [11] B. Bussmann, J. Nys, and S. Latré. 2021. Neural additive vector autoregression models for causal discovery in time series. In International Conference on Discovery Science . Cham: Springer International Publishing, 446–460. [12] G. M. Caporale and N. Pittis. 1997. Causality and forecasting in incomplete systems. Journal of Forecasting 16, 6 (1997), 425–437. [13] A. Cirone and T. B. Pepinsky. 2022. Historical persistence. Annual Review of Political Science 25, 1 (2022), 241–259. [14] P. J. Clare, T. A. Dobbins, and R. P. Mattick. 2019. Causal models adjusting for time-varying confounding—a systematic review of the literature. International journal of epidemiology 48, 1 (2019), 254–265. [15] G. Cooper. 1999. An overview of the representation and discovery of causal relationships using Bayesian networks. Computation, causation, and discovery 

(1999), 4–62. [16] Michael Coppedge, Amanda B. Edgell, Carl Henrik Knutsen, , and Staffan I. Lindberg. 2022. Why democracies develop and decline . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. [17] M. Coppedge, J. Gerring, A. Glynn, C. H. Knutsen, S. I. Lindberg, D. ... Pemstein, and K. Marquardt. 2020. Varieties of democracy: Measuring two centuries of political change . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. [18] S. J. Cranmer and B. A. Desmarais. 2017. What can we learn from predictive modeling? Political Analysis 25, 2 (2017), 145–166. [19] P. T. Damos. 2024. On formal limitations of causal ecological networks. Philo-sophical Transactions B 379, 1909 (2024), 20230170. [20] A. Defilippo, F. M. Giorgi, P. Veltri, and P. H. Guzzi. 2024. Understanding complex systems through differential causal networks. Scientific Reports 14, 1 (2024), 27431. [21] F. X. Diebold. 2016. Comparing predictive accuracy, twenty years later: A personal perspective on the use and abuse of Diebold–Mariano tests. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 33, 1 (2016), 1. [22] Y. Ding, X. Zhu, R. Pan, and B. Zhang. 2025. Network Vector Autoregression with Time-Varying Nodal Influence. Computational Economics (2025), 1–27. [23] M. P. Ekstrom and T. L. Marzetta. 1981. Fundamentals of multidimensional time-series analysis. In Identification of Seismic Sources—Earthquake or Underground Explosion: Proceedings of the NATO Advance Study Institute . Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 615–647. [24] U. Engel. 2021. Causal and predictive modeling in computational social science .Taylor and Francis. [25] T. G. Falleti and J. F. Lynch. 2009. A survey on long short-term memory networks for time series prediction. Comparative political studies 42, 9 (2009), 1143–1166. [26] K. J. Friston, L. Harrison, and W. Penny. 2003. Dynamic causal modelling. Neu-roimage 19, 4 (2003), 1273–1302. [27] K. J. Friston, K. H. Preller, C. Mathys, H. Cagnan, J. Heinzle, A. Razi, and P. Zeidman. 2019. Dynamic causal modelling revisited. Neuroimage 199 (2019), 730–744. [28] J. Gerring. 2005. Causation: A unified framework for the social sciences. Journal of theoretical politics 17, 2 (2005), 163–198. [29] T. Gerstenberg and S. Stephan. 2021. A counterfactual simulation model of causation by omission. Cognition 216 (2021), 104842. [30] C. Glymour, K. Zhang, and P. Spirtes. 2019. Review of causal discovery methods based on graphical models. Frontiers in genetics 10 (2019), 524. [31] R. Guidotti, A. Monreale, S. Ruggieri, F. Turini, F. Giannotti, and D. Pedreschi. 2018. A survey of methods for explaining black box models. ACM computing surveys 51, 5 (2018), 1–42. [32] J. Y. Halpern. 2016. Appropriate causal models and the stability of causation. The Review of Symbolic Logic 9, 1 (2016), 76–102. [33] J. M. Haslbeck, L. F. Bringmann, and L. J. Waldorp. 2021. A tutorial on estimating time-varying vector autoregressive models. Multivariate behavioral research 56, 1 (2021), 120–149. [34] B. C. Herd and S. Miles. 2019. Detecting causal relationships in simulation models using intervention-based counterfactual analysis. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology 10, 5 (2019), 1–25. [35] J. M. Hofman, A. Sharma, and D. J. Watts. 2017. Prediction and explanation in social systems. Science 355, 6324 (2017), 486–488. [36] J. M. Hofman, D. J. Watts, S. Athey, F. Garip, T. L. Griffiths, ... Kleinberg, J., and T. Yarkoni. 2021. Integrating explanation and prediction in computational social science. Nature 595, 7866 (2021), 181–188. [37] R. Horský. 2017. Non-stationary Stochastic Sequences as Solutions to Ill-posed Problems. Working Paper . Manuscript submitted for review. [38] T. Y. Hsieh. 2021. Explainable Predictive Modeling and Causal Effect Estimation from Complex Time-Varying Data . The Pennsylvania State University. [39] A. Inoue and L. Kilian. 2013. Inference on impulse response functions in structural VAR models. Journal of Econometrics 177, 1 (2013), 1–13. [40] M. Ivanovs, R. Kadikis, and K. Ozols. 2021. Perturbation-based methods for explaining deep neural networks: A survey. Pattern Recognition Letters 150 (2021), 228–234. [41] B. James. 2024. Achieving Coherence: Modeling Complexity in Dynamic Systems. 

Working Paper . Manuscript submitted for review. [42] Y. Karaca and D. Baleanu. 2023. Evolutionary mathematical science, fractional modeling and artificial intelligence of nonlinear dynamics in complex systems. 

Chaos Theory and Applications 4, 3 (2023), 111–118. [43] V. Kuskova, D. Zaytsev, , and M. Coppedge. 2026. Benchmarking Neural Causal Inference in Dynamic Panel Time Series. KDD 2026 . Manuscript submitted for review. [44] B. Lindemann, T. Müller, H. Vietz, N. Jazdi, and M. Weyrich. 2021. A survey on long short-term memory networks for time series prediction. Procedia Cirp 99, 1 (2021), 650–655. [45] H. Lütkepohl. 2018. Impulse response function. In The new Palgrave dictionary of economics . Palgrave Macmillan, London, 6141–6145. [46] Faheem M, Aslam MU, and Kakolu SR. 2024. Enhancing financial forecasting accuracy through AI-driven predictive analytics models . doi:10.13140/RG.2.2.36214. 20800 [47] R. P. Masini, M. C. Medeiros, and E. F. Mendes. 2023. Machine learning advances for time series forecasting. Journal of economic surveys 37, 1 (2023), 76–111. [48] C. Molnar and T. Freiesleben. 2024. Supervised Machine Learning for Science: How to stop worrying and love your black box . Christoph Molnar. [49] S. L. Morgan and C. Winship. 2014. Counterfactuals and causal inference: Methods and principles for social research . Cambridge University Press, Campbridge, UK. [50] S. Morlidge. 2013. How good is a “good” forecast? Forecast errors and their avoidability. Foresight: The International Journal of Applied Forecasting 30 (2013), 5–11. [51] M. N. Nounou. 2006. Multiscale finite impulse response modeling. ngineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 19, 3 (2006), 289–304. [52] S. M. Potter. 2000. Nonlinear impulse response functions. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 24, 10 (2000), 1425–1446. [53] M. Prosperi, Y. Guo, M. Sperrin, J. S. Koopman, J. S. Min, X. He, ..., and J. Bian. 2020. Causal inference and counterfactual prediction in machine learning for actionable healthcare. Nature Machine Intelligence 2, 7 (2020), 369–375. [54] A. Rawal, A. Raglin, D. B. Rawat, B. M. Sadler, and J. McCoy. 2025. Causality for trustworthy artificial intelligence: status, challenges and perspectives. Comput. Surveys 57, 6 (2025), 1–30. [55] L. N. Ross. 2024. What is social structural explanation? A causal account. Noûs 

58, 1 (2024), 163–179. [56] B. Rossi. 2024. Recent developments in forecast evaluation. In Handbook of research methods and applications in macroeconomic forecasting . 274. [57] B. M. Rottman and R. Hastie. 2014. Reasoning about causal relationships: Infer-ences on causal networks. Psychological bulletin 140, 1 (2014), 109. , , Zaytsev et al. 

[58] C. Rudin, C. Chen, Z. Chen, H. Huang, L. Semenova, and C. Zhong. 2022. In-terpretable machine learning: Fundamental principles and 10 grand challenges. 

Statistic Surveys 16 (2022), 1–85. [59] F. Ruge-Murcia. 2025. Using generalized impulse response functions to estimate nonlinear dynamic models. Econometric Reviews (2025), 1–24. [60] R. Salmerón Gómez, J. García Pérez, M. D. M. López Martín, and C. G. García. 2016. Collinearity diagnostic applied in ridge estimation through the variance inflation factor. Journal of Applied Statistics 43, 10 (2016), 1831–1849. [61] A. R. Sedler, C. Versteeg, and C. Pandarinath. 2023. Expressive architectures enhance interpretability of dynamics-based neural population models. Neurons, behavior, data analysis, and theory 10 (2023), 51628. [62] A. Smart and A. Kasirzadeh. 2025. Beyond model interpretability: Socio-structural explanations in machine learning. AI & Society 40, 4 (2025), 2045–2053. [63] N. R. Swanson and C. W. Granger. 1997. Impulse response functions based on a causal approach to residual orthogonalization in vector autoregressions. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 92, 437 (1997), 357–367. [64] N. R. Swanson and C. W. Granger. 2024. The Information Impulse Function: Detecting Temporal Changes in Structural Response. Sandia National Lab (2024). [65] A. H. Tan. 2022. Kernel-based impulse response estimation using perturbation signals with harmonic suppression. IEEE Control Systems Letters 7 (2022), 607– 612. [66] P. Thagard. 2008. Causation in international relations: Reclaiming causal analysis .Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. [67] P. Thagard. 2012. The cognitive science of science: Explanation, discovery, and conceptual change. Mit Press, Boston, MA. [68] J. Thornes. 2020. Problems in the identification of stability and structure from temporal data series. In Space and time in geomorphology (2020), 327–353. [69] P. Varshney, A. Lucieri, C. Balada, A. Dengel, and S. Ahmed. 2024. Generating counterfactual trajectories with latent diffusion models for concept discovery. In 

International Conference on Pattern Recognition . Pham: Springer Nature Switzer-land, 138–153. [70] A. Wagner. 1999. Causality in complex systems. Biology and Philosophy 1 (1999), 83–101. [71] E. Weber and B. Leuridan. 2008. Counterfactual causality, empirical research, and the role of theory in the social sciences. Historical Methods: A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History 41, 4 (2008), 197–201. [72] J. Weilbach, S. Gerwinn, K. Barsim, and M. Fränzle. 2024. Counterfactual-Based Root Cause Analysis for Dynamical Systems. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases (2024), 303–319. [73] M. R. Wickens and R. Motto. 2001. Estimating shocks and impulse response functions. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 16, 3 (2001), 371–387. [74] X. Zhu, R. Pan, G. Li, Y. Liu, and H. Wang. 2017. Network vector autoregression. 

The Annals of Statistics 45, 3 (2017), 1096–1123. 

## A Data and code availability 

All data and code for this paper will be made publicly available upon acceptance for publication. 

## B Baseline Model Details 

This appendix provides implementation details for all baseline mod-els used in the empirical evaluation. The purpose is transparency and reproducibility. All models are trained and evaluated under the same panel-aware data splits described in Section 5. 

## B.1 Ridge Vector Autoregression (Ridge VAR) 

Model specification. The Ridge VAR baseline is a first-order vector autoregressive model of the form 

x𝑡 = B x 𝑡 −1 + 𝜺 𝑡 , (21) where x𝑡 ∈ R𝑁 denotes the vector of observed variables at time 𝑡 ,

B ∈ R𝑁 ×𝑁 is a constant coefficient matrix, and 𝜺 𝑡 is an innovation term. The lag order is fixed to one for all experiments. 

Estimation and regularization. The coefficient matrix B is esti-mated by minimizing the ridge-regularized least squares objective 

min 

> B
> 𝑇

∑︁  

> 𝑡 =2

∥x𝑡 − B x 𝑡 −1 ∥22 + 𝜆 ∥B∥2 

> 𝐹

, (22) where 𝜆 > 0 is a fixed regularization parameter and ∥·∥ 𝐹 denotes the Frobenius norm. 

Forecast distribution. Predictive uncertainty is constructed using empirical residual resampling. Let 

b𝜺 𝑡 = x𝑡 − bB x 𝑡 −1 (23) denote in-sample residuals. One-step-ahead predictive samples are generated as 

bx(𝑏 )  

> 𝑡 +1

= bB x 𝑡 + b𝜺 (𝑏 ) , (24) where b𝜺 (𝑏 ) is drawn with replacement from the empirical residual set. 

## B.2 Time-Varying Vector Autoregression (TV-VAR) 

Model specification. The TV-VAR baseline is a locally time-varying first-order VAR of the form 

x𝑡 = B(𝑡 ) x𝑡 −1 + 𝜺 𝑡 , (25) where the coefficient matrix B(𝑡 ) is allowed to vary smoothly over time. 

Kernel-weighted estimation. Local estimates of B(𝑡 ) are obtained via kernel-weighted ridge regression. For a target time index 𝑡 ∗,coefficients are estimated by solving 

min 

> B
> 𝑇

∑︁ 

> 𝑠 =2

𝐾 

 𝑠 − 𝑡 ∗

ℎ



∥x𝑠 − B x 𝑠 −1 ∥22 + 𝜆 ∥B∥2 

> 𝐹

, (26) where 𝐾 (·) is a kernel function and ℎ > 0 is a bandwidth parameter. A Gaussian kernel is used: 

𝐾 (𝑢 ) = exp  − 12𝑢 2  . (27) The bandwidth ℎ is fixed across all experiments. 

Estimation window. All observations within the training segment contribute to local estimation, with weights determined by temporal proximity to 𝑡 ∗. No rolling refits or expanding windows are used beyond kernel weighting. 

Forecast distribution. Predictive distributions are generated by combining the locally estimated coefficient matrix bB(𝑡 ∗) with resid-ual resampling, using the same procedure as in Appendix B.1. 

## B.3 LSTM with Monte Carlo Dropout 

Model specification. The LSTM baseline is a recurrent neural network trained for one-step-ahead prediction. Given an input sequence of length 𝐿 , the model maps 

(x𝑡 −𝐿 , . . . , x𝑡 −1) ↦ → bx𝑡 . (28) The architecture consists of: 

• one LSTM layer, 

• a fixed hidden state dimension, 

• a fully connected linear output layer. From Causal Discovery to Dynamic Causal Inference in Neural Time Series , , 

Dropout and training. Dropout is applied to the hidden state with a fixed dropout probability 𝑝 . The model is trained using mean squared error loss and stochastic gradient descent with adaptive learning rates. 

Predictive distribution via Monte Carlo dropout. Predictive uncer-tainty is approximated using Monte Carlo dropout. At prediction time, dropout remains active and 𝐵 stochastic forward passes are performed: 

bx(𝑏 ) 

> 𝑡

= 𝑓 𝜃 (𝑏 ) (x𝑡 −𝐿 :𝑡 −1), 𝑏 = 1, . . . , 𝐵, (29) where 𝜃 (𝑏 ) denotes a stochastic realization of network weights induced by dropout. The empirical distribution of {bx(𝑏 ) 

> 𝑡

}𝐵 𝑏 =1 is used to compute pre-dictive scores and uncertainty measures. 

## C Evaluation Metrics and Comparison Measures 

This appendix documents the evaluation measures used to compare DCNAR with baseline models in Section 5. The goal of these mea-sures is to assess predictive credibility, uncertainty calibration, and causal behavior under perturbation. All metrics are computed con-sistently across models using identical training–evaluation splits. 

## C.1 Multi-horizon predictive distribution accuracy (CRPS) 

Predictive distribution accuracy is evaluated using the Continuous Ranked Probability Score (CRPS), a proper scoring rule for proba-bilistic forecasts. For a scalar outcome 𝑦 𝑡 with predictive cumulative distribution function 𝐹 𝑡 , the CRPS is defined as 

CRPS (𝐹 𝑡 , 𝑦 𝑡 ) =

∫ ∞−∞ 

(𝐹 𝑡 (𝑧 ) − I{𝑧 ≥ 𝑦 𝑡 }) 2 𝑑𝑧. (30) Equivalently, when 𝐹 𝑡 is represented by an empirical predictive distribution with samples {𝑋 (𝑏 ) 

> 𝑡

}𝐵 𝑏 =1, CRPS can be written as 

CRPS (𝐹 𝑡 , 𝑦 𝑡 ) = E |𝑋 𝑡 − 𝑦 𝑡 | − 12 E 𝑋 𝑡 − 𝑋 ′ 

> 𝑡

, (31) where 𝑋 𝑡 and 𝑋 ′ 

> 𝑡

are independent draws from 𝐹 𝑡 .For multi-horizon evaluation, predictive distributions are gener-ated at horizons ℎ = 1, . . . , 𝐻 , and CRPS values are averaged across horizons, variables, countries, and forecast origins. 

## C.2 Local one-step distributional accuracy 

To assess short-horizon predictive behavior independently of long-run dynamics, we also compute local one-step-ahead CRPS. For each forecast origin 𝑡 , a one-step predictive distribution 𝐹 𝑡 +1 is generated using information available up to time 𝑡 . The resulting CRPS values are averaged across countries, variables, and forecast origins: 

CRPS local = 1

𝑁𝐶𝑇 

> 𝐶

∑︁ 

> 𝑐 =1
> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

∑︁ 𝑡 ∈ T 

CRPS 



𝐹 (𝑐,𝑖 ) 

> 𝑡 +1

, 𝑥 (𝑐,𝑖 )

> 𝑡 +1



, (32) where 𝐶 denotes the number of countries, 𝑁 the number of vari-ables, and T the set of evaluation times. This metric isolates local distributional accuracy without con-flating it with longer-horizon stability or propagation effects. 

## C.3 Prediction interval coverage 

Uncertainty calibration is assessed via empirical coverage of nom-inal prediction intervals. For each predictive distribution 𝐹 𝑡 , we construct a (1 − 𝛼 ) prediction interval 

𝑄 𝛼 /2 (𝐹 𝑡 ), 𝑄 1−𝛼 /2 (𝐹 𝑡 ) ,

where 𝑄 𝑞 (𝐹 𝑡 ) denotes the 𝑞 -th quantile of the predictive distribu-tion. Empirical coverage at horizon ℎ is defined as 

Coverage (ℎ) = 1

𝑁𝐶 

> 𝐶

∑︁ 

> 𝑐 =1
> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

I

n

𝑥 (𝑐,𝑖 ) 

> 𝑡 +ℎ

∈

h

𝑄 𝛼 /2 (𝐹 (𝑐,𝑖 ) 

> 𝑡 +ℎ

), 𝑄 1−𝛼 /2 (𝐹 (𝑐,𝑖 ) 

> 𝑡 +ℎ

)

i o 

,

(33) averaged across forecast origins 𝑡 .We report coverage for 𝛼 = 0.10 , corresponding to nominal 90% prediction intervals. 

## C.4 Representative counterfactual impulse responses 

Causal behavior is evaluated using impulse responses and coun-terfactual trajectories derived from each fitted model. For a given forecast origin 𝑡 0 and shock variable 𝑗 , we construct a counter-factual trajectory by applying an intervention 𝜹 𝑡 to the system dynamics. Let x(0) 

> 𝑡

denote the baseline trajectory generated by the fitted model, and x(𝛿 ) 

> 𝑡

the trajectory under intervention. A one-time unit shock at horizon ℎ = 1 is defined as 

𝜹 𝑡 =

(

𝛿 e𝑗 , 𝑡 = 𝑡 0 + 1,

0, otherwise ,

where e𝑗 is the 𝑗 -th canonical basis vector and 𝛿 is scaled to the empirical standard deviation of variable 𝑗 .The counterfactual impulse response for variable 𝑖 at horizon ℎ

is then defined as 

IRF 𝑖 ←𝑗 (𝑡 0, ℎ ) = 𝑥 (𝛿 ) 

> 𝑖,𝑡 0+ℎ

− 𝑥 (0) 

> 𝑖,𝑡 0+ℎ

. (34) For system-level analysis, we summarize counterfactual devia-tion using the 𝐿 2 norm across variables: 

R ( 𝑡 0 + ℎ) = x(𝛿 ) 

> 𝑡 0+ℎ

− x(0)  

> 𝑡 0+ℎ2

. (35) Representative impulse responses and system-level counterfac-tual trajectories are selected for illustrative comparison across mod-els in Section 5. 

## D Implementation Details for DCNAR 

This appendix documents implementation details of DCNAR to support reproducibility. All design choices reported here correspond to the experiments described in Section 5. 

## D.1 Causal Discovery Stage 

NAVAR variant. The causal discovery stage is instantiated using a neural additive vector autoregression (NAVAR) model with addi-tive, variable-specific neural components. Each target variable is modeled independently using a feedforward neural network with convolutional preprocessing over lagged inputs (MLP/Conv vari-ant). No recurrent components are used. , , Zaytsev et al. 

Lag length. The maximum lag length is fixed to 

𝐿 = 8, (36) and identical lag structure is used for all variables and all countries. 

Regularization. Sparsity in the learned causal graph is encour-aged through ℓ1 regularization applied to the additive component functions. Specifically, regularization is applied to the contribution magnitudes of the neural functions 𝑓 𝑖 𝑗ℓ , encouraging many directed interactions to shrink toward zero. Weight decay is additionally applied to stabilize neural optimization. 

Normalization. No normalization is applied to the input time se-ries prior to NAVAR training. Likewise, no normalization is applied to the learned causal score matrix. All causal scores are therefore expressed in the native scale of the data and are treated as relative, not absolute, measures of influence. 

Output. The output of the causal discovery stage is a directed causal score matrix 

S ∈ R𝑁 ×𝑁 ,

aggregated across lags. This matrix is treated as a structural hy-pothesis rather than as an inferential object. Additional processing of S (e.g., necessity filtering, stability screening) is described below. 

## D.2 Construction of the Structural Prior via Edge Ablation 

The purpose of refining the causal adjacency matrix is to obtain a sparse structural prior that prioritizes directed relationships which could materially affect model behavior. A detailed methodological treatment and evaluation of this approach is provided in [ 43 ]; here we document its role in the present experiments. 

Edge ablation procedure. Starting from an initial directed adja-cency matrix inferred during the causal discovery stage, we con-sider the effect of selectively removing individual directed edges. For each ordered pair ( 𝑗, 𝑖 ) such that the initial adjacency matrix indicates a potential connection, we construct an ablated variant of the network in which that single edge is removed while all other edges are retained. For each ablated network, the dynamic model is re-estimated using the same specification and hyperparameters as the full model, differing only in the exclusion of the selected edge. This yields a family of models that are identical except for the presence or absence of a single directed interaction. 

Forecast-based comparison. To assess the impact of edge removal, we compare out-of-sample predictive behavior of the full model and each ablated variant using a fixed forecasting protocol. Let 𝑒 (0)

> 𝑡

denote the forecast error at time 𝑡 under the full model and 𝑒 (− 𝑖 𝑗 )

> 𝑡

the corresponding error under the model in which edge ( 𝑗, 𝑖 ) has been removed. The effect of ablation is summarized by the loss differential 

𝑑 (𝑖 𝑗 ) 

> 𝑡

= 𝐿 (𝑒 (− 𝑖 𝑗 ) 

> 𝑡

) − 𝐿 (𝑒 (0) 

> 𝑡

),

where 𝐿 (·) is a fixed loss function. Positive average loss differentials indicate that removal of the edge degrades predictive performance, while negligible or negative differentials suggest that the edge does not materially affect model behavior. 

Statistical assessment. Statistical significance of loss differentials is evaluated using Diebold–Mariano tests [ 21 ], which account ex-plicitly for serial dependence in forecast errors. These tests assess whether the predictive performance of the ablated model differs systematically from that of the full model over the evaluation pe-riod. Edges whose removal leads to statistically significant degrada-tion in predictive performance are retained in the structural prior. Edges whose removal has little or no effect are excluded. The result-ing adjacency matrix is therefore weighted and sparse, reflecting predictive necessity rather than coefficient magnitude. 

Dynamic coherence screening. As a supplementary diagnostic, we examine whether the resulting structural prior yields stable and in-terpretable time-varying dynamics. Specifically, we assess whether estimated causal influence trajectories exhibit smooth temporal evolution rather than erratic fluctuation. Structures that produce highly unstable or noisy dynamics are treated as unreliable and excluded from further analysis. 

Role in the present paper. In the experiments reported in this paper, the structural prior supplied to the dynamic inference stage is the weighted adjacency matrix obtained via this edge ablation procedure. The procedure is used solely to select a plausible and empirically grounded structural prior; the substantive evaluation of edge necessity, stability, and coherence is outside the scope of the present work and is addressed in detail in [43]. 

## D.3 Dynamic Inference Stage 

tvNAR formulation. Dynamic causal inference is performed us-ing a time-varying network autoregressive model [ 22 ] conditioned on a learned structural prior. The primary specification used in the main text is tvNAR(1), which takes the form 

x𝑡 = (bG + I) 𝚲 (𝑡 ) x𝑡 −1 + 𝜺 𝑡 ,

where bG is the learned adjacency matrix and 𝚲 (𝑡 ) is a diagonal matrix of time-varying node influence parameters. 

tvNAR( 𝑝 ). The implementation supports higher-order dynamics via tvNAR( 𝑝 ), 

x𝑡 =

> 𝑝

∑︁ 

> ℓ=1

(bG + I) 𝚲 ℓ (𝑡 ) x𝑡 −ℓ + 𝜺 𝑡 ,

of which tvNAR(1) is a special case. In practice, tvNAR(1) is used in the main experiments, while tvNAR( 𝑝 ) is explored in supplementary analyses. 

Kernel smoothing. Time variation in 𝚲 (𝑡 ) is estimated using kernel-weighted local regression over a normalized time index 

𝜏 ∈ ( 0, 1). A Gaussian kernel is used: 

𝐾 (𝑢 ) = exp  − 12𝑢 2  ,

with a fixed bandwidth parameter. Kernel weights are computed within each country series and then pooled across countries using panel-aware indexing. From Causal Discovery to Dynamic Causal Inference in Neural Time Series , , 

Time indexing in panel data. Each country time series is mapped to a normalized time index 

𝜏 𝑐,𝑡 = 𝑡 𝑇 𝑐 

,

where 𝑇 𝑐 is the length of the series for country 𝑐 . Kernel smoothing is performed with respect to 𝜏 𝑐,𝑡 , allowing time variation to be estimated consistently across panels of equal length. All panel splitting and indexing respect country boundaries; no temporal leakage occurs across units. 

## D.4 Computational Considerations 

Runtime. The computational cost of DCNAR is dominated by the causal discovery stage. NAVAR training scales approximately as 

O( 𝑁 2 · 𝐿 · 𝑇 ),

where 𝑁 is the number of variables, 𝐿 the lag length, and 𝑇 the total number of time points across panels. In the experiments reported here, NAVAR training completes within two-three minutes on a single GPU. The dynamic inference stage scales linearly in 𝑇 for fixed 𝑁 and is computationally lightweight relative to NAVAR. 

Memory usage. Memory requirements are modest. NAVAR re-quires storing lagged input tensors and per-variable neural models, while tvNAR requires only the learned adjacency matrix and time-varying coefficient paths. All experiments fit comfortably within standard GPU memory constraints. 

Parallelization. The implementation supports parallelization across countries at both stages. NAVAR training is parallelized implicitly through batched optimization, while tvNAR estimation and coun-terfactual simulation are embarrassingly parallel across panels and forecast horizons. All reported experiments were run using stan-dard multi-core CPU resources and a single GPU. 

Reproducibility. All hyperparameters, data splits, and model con-figurations are fixed across experiments. No manual tuning is per-formed per country or per variable. The full experimental pipeline is deterministic up to stochastic neural optimization and Monte Carlo sampling used for uncertainty estimation. 

## E Extended Panel Analysis Setup 

This appendix documents the data construction and experimental protocol for the extended panel analysis used to assess the robust-ness of DCNAR to increased temporal support. Results correspond-ing to this setup are reported in Appendix E.4. 

## E.1 Extended Dataset Construction 

The extended panel is derived from the Varieties of Democracy (V-Dem) country–year dataset and uses the same set of democ-racy components as the main analysis. Variable definitions, coding procedures, and substantive interpretation are identical to those described in Section 5. Unlike the main panel, which prioritizes breadth across countries, the extended panel prioritizes temporal depth. Countries are re-tained only if they exhibit complete, uninterrupted coverage across all selected variables for a substantially longer time span. This re-quirement leads to a smaller but temporally richer sample. The resulting dataset consists of 89 countries, observed annually for 

𝑇 = 75 consecutive years, with no missing values across the selected democracy components. This construction yields a strongly balanced panel with approxi-mately twice the temporal length of the main analysis but fewer cross-sectional units. No additional filtering or transformation is applied beyond the criteria above. 

## E.2 Motivation for Extended Panel Analysis 

The extended panel serves as a robustness check for dynamic causal inference under substantially different data conditions. While the main analysis reflects the standard setting in empirical democracy research, where data are typically represented by many countries with relatively short time series, the extended panel approximates a complementary regime with longer temporal trajectories but reduced cross-sectional diversity. Evaluating DCNAR under both configurations allows us to assess whether its inferred dynamic causal behavior depends critically on the short-panel setting or whether it reflects more persistent features of the data-generating process. In particular, the extended panel tests whether impulse responses and counterfactual trajecto-ries remain stable when substantially more temporal information is available for each unit. 

## E.3 Experimental Protocol 

The experimental protocol for the extended panel mirrors that of the main analysis as closely as possible. All modeling choices, hyperparameters, and evaluation procedures are held fixed. Specifically: 

• The same causal discovery procedure is applied to the ex-tended panel without retuning. 

• The same DCNAR dynamic inference configuration is used. 

• The same baseline models (Ridge VAR, TV-VAR, and LSTM with Monte Carlo dropout) are evaluated. 

• Training–evaluation splits are defined analogously, with each country series divided into a training segment and a held-out evaluation segment. No model parameters are adjusted to account for the increased temporal length. This ensures that differences in behavior can be attributed to data characteristics rather than to changes in model specification. 

## E.4 Results 

This section reports results for the extended panel analysis based on the 75-year sample and interprets them in relation to the main results presented in Section 5. The purpose of this appendix is not to introduce new findings, but to assess the robustness of DCNAR’s dynamic causal behavior under substantially increased temporal support. 

Predictive and distributional performance. Panels (A)–(C) of Fig-ure 3 summarize predictive distribution accuracy and calibration across models. As in the main analysis, DCNAR achieves predictive performance comparable to linear and time-varying VAR baselines , , Zaytsev et al. 

across forecast horizons. Differences in CRPS and one-step distribu-tional accuracy are modest, and no model consistently dominates across all horizons. 

Figure 3: Comparison of DCNAR on 89-countries, 75-year panel, with Ridge VAR, TV-VAR, and LSTM (MC Dropout) across predictive (panel A, CRPS), distributional (panel B, lo-cal distributional accuracy - mean one-step-ahead CRPS), and causal diagnostics (panel C, nominal 90% prediction intervals across horizons) on the short-panel democracy dataset. Panel D shows representative counterfactual impulse response fol-lowing a positive shock to freedom of expression (Albania). 

Empirical coverage of nominal 90% prediction intervals remains stable for DCNAR across horizons, with coverage behavior similar to that observed in the shorter panel. The LSTM baseline again ex-hibits undercoverage, indicating miscalibrated uncertainty despite competitive point forecasts in some regimes. These patterns closely mirror those observed in the main analysis, suggesting that in-creased temporal depth does not materially alter relative predictive or calibration performance. 

Impulse response behavior. Panel (D) of Figure 3 presents a repre-sentative counterfactual impulse response for Albania following a positive shock to freedom of expression. The qualitative behavior of the DCNAR impulse response is consistent with the main results: the response is smooth, monotonic, and gradually decaying over the forecast horizon. In contrast, Ridge VAR and TV-VAR responses again exhibit oscillations and sign reversals, while the LSTM response remains difficult to interpret causally. The persistence of these qualitative differences in a substantially longer panel indicates that DCNAR’s impulse-response behavior is not an artifact of short time series or limited temporal resolution. 

System-level counterfactual dynamics. Figure 4 extends the anal-ysis to system-level counterfactual trajectories, summarized using the 𝐿 2 norm across all variables, for multiple countries. Under DC-NAR, counterfactual paths diverge smoothly from their correspond-ing baseline trajectories and remain bounded over the forecast horizon. Differences in magnitude across countries reflect known heterogeneity in institutional configurations, while the qualitative form of the response is consistent. 

Figure 4: System-level counterfactual trajectories under DC-NAR on 89-coutries, 75-year panel, summarized by the 𝐿 2

normalization across all democracy components, for Albania, the United States, and Mexico. Solid lines denote trajectories under a localized positive shock to freedom of expression at horizon ℎ = 1; dashed lines denote corresponding baseline trajectories without intervention. 

The absence of explosive growth, erratic oscillation, or abrupt reversals in these trajectories provides further evidence that the learned structural prior stabilizes dynamic inference even when substantially more temporal information is available. 

Implications for stability. Taken together, the extended panel results reinforce the central claim of the paper: DCNAR yields stable and interpretable dynamic causal behavior across data regimes with very different temporal characteristics. The consistency of impulse responses and counterfactual trajectories across the 35-year and 75-year panels suggests that DCNAR captures persistent features of the underlying data-generating process rather than overfitting to a particular sample window. These findings support the interpretation of DCNAR as a robust methodological instrument for dynamic causal analysis in observa-tional panel settings, rather than as a model whose conclusions are sensitive to specific data configurations. 

## E.5 Scope and Interpretation 

The purpose of the extended panel analysis is not to improve pre-dictive performance or to optimize model fit under favorable condi-tions. Rather, it is intended to assess the stability and robustness of dynamic causal behavior, in particular, impulse responses and coun-terfactual trajectories, when the amount of temporal information available per unit is substantially increased. Results presented in Appendix E.4 should therefore be inter-preted qualitatively, in comparison to the main analysis, with em-phasis on consistency of dynamic patterns rather than on absolute performance metrics.