Title: KUDA: Knowledge Unlearning by Deviating Representation for Large Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.19275v2

Published Time: Wed, 25 Feb 2026 02:19:03 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# KUDA: Knowledge Unlearning by Deviating Representation for Large Language Models 

## Ce Fang 1, Zhikun Zhang 1, Min Chen 2, Qing Liu 1, Lu Zhou 3, Zhe Liu 1# , Yunjun Gao 1# ,

> 1

## Zhejiang University 2Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam 

> 3

## Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

## Abstract 

Large language models (LLMs) acquire a large amount of knowledge through pre-training on vast and diverse corpora. While this endows LLMs with strong capabilities in genera-tion and reasoning, it amplifies risks associated with sensitive, copyrighted, or harmful content in training data. LLM unlearn-ing, which aims to remove specific knowledge encoded within models, is a promising technique to reduce these risks. How-ever, existing LLM unlearning methods often force LLMs to generate random or incoherent answers due to their in-ability to alter the encoded knowledge precisely. To achieve effective unlearning at the knowledge level of LLMs, we pro-pose Knowledge Unlearning by Deviating represent Ation 

(KUDA). We first utilize causal tracing to locate specific layers for target knowledge storage. We then design a new unlearning objective that induces the model’s representations to deviate from its original position in the phase of knowl-edge removal, thus disrupting the ability to associate with the target knowledge. To resolve the optimization conflicts between forgetting and retention, we employ a relaxation null-space projection mechanism to mitigate the disruption to the representation space of retaining knowledge. Extensive ex-periments on representative benchmarks, WMDP and MUSE, demonstrate that KUDA outperforms most existing baselines by effectively balancing knowledge removal and model utility retention. 

## 1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated great po-tential across various domains, such as scientific research [38], education [67], and economics [34]. These capabilities stem from the process of pre-training, during which LLMs learn and store extensive knowledge from diverse corpora [32, 76]. However, the training corpora are primarily collected from the Internet, which may contain sensitive personal information, dangerous knowledge, or copyrighted content [25, 56]. This 

> #Corresponding authors.

raises societal safety concerns, as there is growing awareness that LLMs have a potential risk of being misused [6,10,43,44]. Alignment training [45] represents the mainstream solution for safety risks. However, the phenomenon of shallow align-ment [47] renders such approaches inherently vulnerable to adversarial attack. To achieve thorough safety, LLM unlearn-ing has emerged as a promising technique by removing the undesired knowledge stored in LLMs’ parameters [36, 52]. 

Existing Solutions. The mainstream unlearning methods for LLMs are to delete or suppress target knowledge that is en-coded in LLMs through updating parameters [36, 49, 52]. The 

full parameter updates methods update all parameters that lead LLMs to generate uncontrolled responses when queries are related to sensitive personal information or dangerous knowledge, which we refer to as target knowledge [14,27,78]. However, the indiscriminate updates risk severe degradations of model utility [52]. Furthermore, the response-oriented methods merely achieve response-level mitigation without inherently removing the target knowledge encoded in the model’s parameters [22, 52, 77]. This renders the removed knowledge easily restored with specific prompts [77]. In comparison, the partial parameter updates approaches only update a portion of parameters to reduce the impact on model utility. Nevertheless, they design the parameter selection and removal algorithm independently, failing to tradeoff the target knowledge removal and model utility re-tention [13, 73]. Concretely, these methods either employ well-designed localization approaches to identify knowledge-relevant parameters and directly apply loss functions from full parameter updates [30, 72], or introduce fine-grained removal algorithms yet rely on empirical results for parameter selec-tion [32]. Therefore, there is a pressing need for a fine-grained, holistic approach that synergistically couples parameter selec-tion and knowledge removal to achieve the balance between target knowledge removal and model utility retention. 

Our Proposal. To this end, we propose Knowledge 

Unlearning by Deviating represent Ation (KUDA), which syn-ergizes parameter selection with knowledge removal based 1

> arXiv:2602.19275v2 [cs.CR] 24 Feb 2026

on the knowledge storage property of LLMs. Specifically, the 

feed-forward neural network (FFN) components at specific layers are responsible for storing knowledge learned from training corpora [18], whereas the multihead self-attention 

(MHSA) components at some layers primarily facilitate se-mantics aggregation [17]. Therefore, by applying updates exclusively to FFNs specialized for knowledge storage, while preserving MHSA components intact, we can remove target knowledge encoded in parameters, with minimal degradation to the LLMs’ general capabilities. However, related works merely confine updates to FFNs’ parameters [32, 72], lack-ing a synergy pipeline that integrates parameter selection and knowledge removal. To bridge this gap, KUDA establishes a partial parameter updates unlearning method operating in the representation space. KUDA begins with a component-level identification method, consisting of causal tracing [40] and the metric causal effect, to pinpoint layers whose FFNs exhibit a significant contribution to knowledge storage. Subsequently, a sliding window search strategy is employed to determine unlearn-ing layers, whose a subset of parameters is then designated for unlearning updates. Building upon the selected layers, KUDA implements knowledge removal by intervening in the corresponding representations (i.e., the activation outputs of models’ intermediate layers) . Since knowledge stored in FFNs is activated and incorporated into representations during generation [11], we design a knowledge removal loss func-tion, which induces deviation to push the representation of target knowledge away from its original state. This disrupts the model’s ability to utilize the knowledge for generation. Simultaneously, a constraint loss is introduced to retain the models’ utility. Besides, we depart from the conventional use of a scaling factor to balance knowledge removal and util-ity retention, as it fails to reconcile the directional conflicts inherent between the two objectives. Instead, we exploit the invariance of null-space. By projecting the unlearning gradi-ents into a relaxation null-space, KUDA eliminates gradient components detrimental to model utility, thereby removing target knowledge while preserving the models’ capabilities. Moreover, we propose a two-stage tuning strategy for the hyperparameter configuration by transforming the joint opti-mization into two decoupled linear searches. 

Evaluation. We conduct experiments on two representative benchmarks to illustrate the superiority of KUDA. First, we showed that KUDA achieves a good trade-off between knowl-edge removal and utility retention. For instance, while achiev-ing near-complete removal of target knowledge, KUDA in-curs marginal utility degradations of only 3.1% on MUSE and 1.7% on WMDP. In addition to unlearning performance, KUDA demonstrates robust model generalizability, seam-lessly extending its unlearning capabilities to modern models like Llama-3.1 and Qwen-3. From the perspective of gradient dynamics, we further reveal that KUDA balances removal and retention by maintaining near-orthogonal gradient directions [………………]   

> 𝑊 !" 𝑊 #$%
> 𝑘
> [………]
> ℎ
> [………]
> 𝑣
> Knowledge Association
> (a) Classic Transformer MHSA
> FFN (b) Llama series

Figure 1: FFN architectures in Transformer-based models. between the two objectives, thereby preventing significant conflicts. Moreover, we demonstrate the complex coupled impact of two influential hyperparameters, i.e. , the inverse un-learning temperature and the null-space relaxation threshold, thus necessitating our decoupled search strategy. 

Contributions. Our contributions are three-folds: • Grounded in the LLMs’ knowledge storage property, we propose a representation-level unlearning method that inte-grates unlearning layer selection , representation deviation ,and relaxation null-space projection . By applying stable updates to parameters correlated with knowledge storage, KUDA achieves precise knowledge removal while retain-ing the LLMs’ utility effectively. • By identifying the stability boundary, we introduce a two-stage tuning strategy that simplifies the complex joint hyper-parameter optimization into two decoupling linear searches. This facilitates the practical deployment across datasets. • We conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the un-learning performance of KUDA. Furthermore, we provide mechanistic insights into gradient dynamics, revealing that KUDA mitigates unlearning conflicts by maintaining near-orthogonal gradients. 

## 2 Preliminary 2.1 Large Language Models 

Transformer-based LLMs achieve context understanding and text generation with two crucial mechanisms: FFN-based associative memory and MHSA-driven contextual interac-tion [18]. Concretely, FFN acts as a knowledge storage repos-itory [18, 40], whereas MHSA facilitates the semantics aggre-gation [17]. 

FFN for Knowledge Storage. FFN can be modeled as atwo-layer key–value knowledge storage [40], as illustrated in Figure 1a. Given an input, the first-layer Win generates a key 

based on the input; the second-layer Wout maps the key to the stored knowledge related to that input, and generates a cor-responding value . This knowledge-retrieval process incorpo-rates rich knowledge into hidden representations to influence 2the final text generation, which can be formally formulated as: 

kli = σ(W lin (hl−1 

> i

)) ,

vli = W lout · kli ,

where l and i represent the layer index and the token position, and σ denotes the activation function, such as ReLU. Win and 

Wout are two-layer linear transformation matrices. For more recent LLMs, such as Llama [63], that adopt the advanced FFN variants, the mechanism of knowledge storage remains functionally equivalent. As presented in Fig-ure 1b, this FFN consists of three linear transformation ma-trices ( Wgate , Wdown , and Wup ), and the process of generating value can be represented as: 

vli = W ldown · [Swish (W lgate (hl−1 

> i

)) ⊗W lup (hl−1 

> i

)] ,

where ⊗ is the Hadamard Product and Swish [51] is an ac-tivation function. Although differing structurally from the classical FFN, the combined operations of Wgate and Wup can still be regarded as the first-layer to form the key, while Wdown 

serves as the second-layer to transform key to value. 

MHSA for Semantics Aggregation. MHSA provides LLMs with powerful capabilities of semantics aggregation [17]. On one hand, it aggregates semantic information from preceding tokens to the current position, thus facilitating the awareness of context. On the other hand, it extracts task-relevant knowl-edge from the representations refined by FFNs’ knowledge storage mechanism. This synergy effect enables LLMs to un-derstand the complex context and utilize the rich knowledge encoded in LLMs’ parameters to generate high-quality text. 

## 2.2 Causal Tracing 

Causal tracing [40] is an interpretability method to quantify the importance of activations across layers and components for generating accurate output. The workflow mainly contains three stages: 

Clear Run. The objective is to collect the original states of text generation. We execute a forward pass with the given prompts to collect activations across all components, denoted as H = {hlm,i | m ∈ { MHSA , FFN , Layer }} , where l is the layer index and i is the token position. Simultaneously, we record the probability P[ta1 ] of the model correctly predicting the first answer token ta1 .

Corrupted Run. The objective is to collect the corrupted states with the perturbed input embedding. We add perturbing noise to the embedding of input tokens to prevent the model from making a correct prediction. Corresponding to “Clear Run,” collect the activations H∗ and the probability P∗[ta1 ] in the current case. 

Corrupted-with-Restoration Run. The objective is to re-store each activation to quantify its importance for the correct prediction. With the perturbed inputs embedding, we individ-ually replace the activations of each component across layers by the correct state from “Clear Run,” and records the result-ing probability P∗

> mli

[ta1 ], where mli is the restored component type m, layer l and token i.

## 2.3 Null-Space 

Null-space is an effective technique for enhancing the stabil-ity and plasticity of deep learning networks in post-training scenarios [15, 68]. The core idea is to confine parameter up-dates within the null-space of the input feature space learned from previous tasks, thereby protecting prior knowledge from updated parameters. For network M trained on prior tasks with data xold , let 

∆wl denote the update gradients of a new task applied to pa-rameters Wold at layer l. When ∆wl lies within the null-space of the input features space Xlold of previous tasks, there is 

∆wl · xlold = 0 [68]. This property prevents detrimental disrup-tion to the representations at layer l learned from previous tasks during continual learning: 

(W lold + ∆wl ) · xlold = W lold · xlold + 0 = ylold 

Therefore, constraining gradients in such null-space could preserve the integrity of the model’s previous foundational capabilities: 

M (xold ,Wold ) = M ′(xold ,Wnew ) = yold 

where Wnew = Wold + ∆w. Briefly, when updates are con-strained in the null-space of input features of layer l, the outputs at l for previous tasks remain “ invariant ” despite the updated parameters. 

## 3 Problem Statement and Existing Solution 3.1 Problem Formulation 

LLM unlearning is defined as the process of selectively re-moving target knowledge from a pre-trained LLM Mθ, which is trained on dataset D. Let Df ⊂ D be the target subset of data to be removed, which is referred to as “forgetting knowl-edge” or “forgetting set.” Correspondingly, Dr = D\Df is denoted as retained data, referred to as “retaining knowledge” 

or “retaining set” . Formally, the objective of LLM unlearn-ing is to derive an unlearned model Mθ′ whose behaviors are consistent with the model M Dr 

> re

retrained on Dr:

Mθ′ (y | x) ≈ M Dr 

> re

(y | x), ∀(x, y) ∈ D,

where M Dr 

> re

is considered as the golden baseline unlearned model. Briefly, LLM unlearning is the process of removing knowledge from Df while retaining knowledge from Dr.33.2 Existing Solution 

GA [27]. Gradient ascent (GA) is the most representative method for LLM unlearning. The general idea is to perform re-verse optimization (gradient ascent instead of descent) on Df ,rewarding LLMs to produce incorrect outputs. Concretely, GA can be formulated as maximizing the negative log-likelihood loss: 

LGA = ED f [∑ log (pθ(xt | x<t )] ,

where pθ(xt |x<t ) is the prediction probability of token xt

calculated by LLM with parameters θ and input tokens x<t .However, directly training with LGA could cause severe model collapse [78]. To address this, gradient difference 

(GradDiff) [39] introduces a constraint term (referred to as retaining loss Lr) on Dr to prevent excessive forgetting. The weighted sum constitutes the formal unlearning objec-tive [74]: 

Lu = Lf (x ∈ Df ; θ) + αLr(x ∈ Dr; θ),

where Lf = LGA , and α is a scaling factor for the balance between forgetting and retention. 

NPO [78]. Negative preference optimization (NPO) is an alternative to GA. Inspired by DPO [50], NPO regards the forgetting data as negative samples, and facilitates forgetting by penalizing the model for generating the dispreferred data: 

LNPO (θ) = − 2

β ED f



log σ



−β log πθ(y | x)

πre f (y | x)

 

,

where σ(·) is the sigmoid function, and πre f and πθ denote the original and the unlearned model, respectively. In comparison with GA, NPO resolves the absence of an optimization lower bound and exhibits a slower divergence rate, leading to a more stable unlearning process. 

RMU [32]. Representation misdirection for unlearning 

(RMU) is the state-of-the-art method of partial parameter updates. It suppresses the generation of target knowledge by driving the internal activations of empirically selected layers towards a random uniform distribution, formulated as: 

LRMU = ED f

∥a f (x) − c · u∥22

 + α · EDr

∥a f (x) − ar(x)∥22

 ,

where u is a random vector, and a represents the activations. 

c and α denote a forgetting coefficient and a scaling factor. RMU achieves knowledge removal by disrupting the original activations of forgetting data, while retaining model utility by enforcing activation consistency on retaining data. 

Drawbacks of Existing Solutions. The methods of full pa-rameter updates exhibit a significant advantage in knowl-edge removal by deliberatively inducing the generation of random responses. However, given that all parameters are updated indiscriminately, they frequently result in irreversible utility degradation or complete model collapse, and may only achieve response-level mitigation instead of removing knowledge encoded in parameters. Conversely, partial pa-rameter updates methods prioritize utility retention yet often fail to achieve satisfactory effectiveness of knowledge re-moval [13, 73]. This deficiency primarily stems from a weak coupling between the parameter selection and the knowledge removal algorithm. While the property of knowledge storage offers a promising design perspective, related efforts remain confined to restricting updates to FFNs’ parameters, lacking a synergetic design that aligns the entire pipeline with such a property. For instance, RMU induces divergence in inter-mediate activations to remove knowledge, yet its parameter selection relies on the empirical search. 

## 4 KUDA 4.1 Intuition 

As detailed in Section 2.1, FFNs act as knowledge storage by activating relevant knowledge stored in parameters to influ-ence the generation. We define the transition process from key to value as “ knowledge association ” (Figure 1a), as this stage achieves the retrieval of relevant knowledge based on input tokens. Through this, the representations contain not only the semantic context of the inputs but also their associations with relevant knowledge. This property implies a viable pathway for controllable knowledge removal by perturbing the knowledge associations in specific FFNs to disrupt the generation of target knowl-edge. It enables a selective update strategy that focuses mod-ifications on the FFNs responsible for knowledge storage, while leaving the MHSA components specific to semantics aggregation entirely intact. Consequently, this achieves target knowledge removal while robustly maintaining model utility by preserving the core semantic capabilities of the MHSA. While conceptually intuitive, the direct quantification and modification of target knowledge encoded in FFNs remains a formidable challenge. However, since representations en-capsulate both input semantics and their associations with relevant knowledge [11, 17], they offer a more accessible pathway for intervening in knowledge associations. Con-sequently, we propose a representation-based unlearning method, named Knowledge Unlearning by Deviating repre-sent Ation (KUDA), to disrupt the utilization of target knowl-edge for generation. 

## 4.2 Overview 

KUDA aims to leverage the property of knowledge storage in Transformer-based models [18, 40] for LLM unlearning. To remove knowledge stored in FFNs, KUDA employs selective parameter updates that deviate the representations of target knowledge away from their original states. The pipeline is illustrated as Figure 2. 4① Unlearning Layers Selection         

> Causal Tracing
> 0.05 0.47 0.83 0.62 0.01 …… ……
> …… ……
> Top -N
> Unlearning Layers
> …
> 𝑹 𝒇𝒐𝒓𝒈𝒆𝒕
> 𝑹 𝒓𝒆𝒕𝒂𝒊𝒏

𝑃        

> Origin
> Origin 𝑵 𝑺 𝒓𝒆𝒕𝒂𝒊𝒏
> ③Relaxation Null -space Projection ②Knowledge Representation Deviation
> 𝑹 𝒓𝒆𝒕𝒂𝒊𝒏
> MHSA FFN
> …

𝑙 ! 𝑙 "𝑙 " 

> !

𝑙 " 

> #

𝑙 "

> $

𝑙 " 

> !

𝑙 " 

> #

𝑙 "

> $

Figure 2: The overview of KUDA pipeline to balance the knowledge removal and utility retention for LLMs. KUDA includes three major stages: 1) We employ causal tracing and causal effect to identify FFNs critical for knowledge storage, and apply a sliding window to select the target unlearning layers for parameter updates. 2) The representations generated from the last unlearning layer are captured and utilized to derive the update gradients ∇Lu based on the mechanism of knowledge representation deviation . 3) The gradients are projected into the relaxation null-space of retaining knowledge, and ∇′Lu is then applied to the last linear transformation matrix of FFN in each unlearning layer. R f orget and Rretain are the representations of forgetting and retaining knowledge. NS retain denotes the relaxation null-space of retaining knowledge. 

Step 1: Unlearning Layers Selection. Our approach begins by identifying layers whose FFNs are specialized in knowl-edge storage. To this end, we employ causal tracing [40] and define a metric named causal effect to achieve a component-level identification. Based on causal effect, we propose a sliding window search strategy to select unlearning layers, a portion of whose parameters is the targets for subsequent updates. We refer the readers to Section 4.3 for more details. 

Step 2: Knowledge Representations Deviation. Knowl-edge stored in FFN parameters is retrieved and incorporated into representations through knowledge association. Building upon this, we design a knowledge removal loss, which in-volves inducing the representation of target knowledge away from its original state. This deviation perturbs the established knowledge associations, thereby disrupting the generation of target knowledge. Besides, a constraint loss is also introduced for retention. The detailed design of unlearning objectives is presented in Section 4.4. 

Step 3: Null-space Projection. To address directional con-flicts between forgetting and retention, we introduce relax-ation null-space projection to eliminate the unlearning gradi-ent components (derived from Step 2) that compromise model utility. Moreover, we propose stochastic proportional sam-pling to resolve computational bottlenecks and introduce the relaxation threshold to prevent excessive suppression to the knowledge removal process. The projected gradients preserve utility without compromising the effectiveness of forgetting. See Section 4.5 for more details. 

## 4.3 Unlearning Layers Selection 

KUDA begins by identifying the LLM layers whose FFNs are predominantly responsible for storing knowledge, which subsequently guides the selection of parameters for updates. 

Causal Effect. Previous studies on layer selection for un-learning primarily focused on either the entanglement degree between forgetting and retaining knowledge [46], or on the layer’s correlation with the LLMs’ refusal behaviors [55]. However, these coarse layer-level granularity methods over-look the functional distinctions between layer-internal com-ponents. Concretely, the contributions of MHSA and FFN are merged by residual connection, rendering the selection results of these methods invariably influenced by both components si-multaneously. This indicates that selected layers may be criti-cal for semantics processing dominated by MHSA [16,20,28], instead of those driven by FFNs for knowledge storage (see Section 2.1 for more details). Therefore, the coarse-grained selection may inadvertently damage the models’ capabilities of context-awareness or text generation. To leverage the knowledge storage property of LLMs, we propose a fine-grained, component-level identification method. Specifically, we identify layers whose FFNs exhibit specialization in knowledge storage, which allows decoupling of MHSA and FFN during layer selection. This motivates the adoption of causal tracing , which quantifies the contribution of each intermediate activation, as detailed in Section 2.2. After performing causal tracing, we define the average proba-bility difference between “Corrupted Run” and “Corrupted-with-restoration Run” as Causal Effect (CE lm), to reveal the importance of components m at layer l for correct generation: CE lm = 1

B · T

> B

# ∑ T

# ∑

> i=1

(P∗

> mli

− P∗), (1) where B and T represent the input batch size and sequence length. Concretely, a higher CE lFFN score reflects that the FFN significantly contributes to knowledge storage during the generation process. Ideally, causal tracing should be performed on task-specific datasets, such as Df or Dr, to pinpoint FNNs storing target knowledge. However, as presented in Section 5.6, the sub-5Algorithm 1 Sliding Window Search 

Require: Scores {CE lFFN }, candidate size N, window size s

Ensure: Selected unlearning layers Wun  

> 1:

Stop = {l(1), · · · , l(N) | rank (CE li 

> FFN

) ≤ N, (1) ≺ · · · ≺ 

(N)} 

> 2:

p ← ⌈ s/2⌉ ▷ Position of l(i) as the window center  

> 3:

for i = ⌈(N + 1)/2⌉ to N do  

> 4:

l j ← Stop (i) 

> 5:

Wj,s ← { l j−p+1, . . . , l j−1, l j, l j+1, . . . , l j+s−p} 

> 6:

if HR (Wj,s) > 0.5 then ▷ Hit Ratio condition  

> 7:

return Wun ← Wj,s 

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

return W⌈(N+1)/2⌉,s

stantial computational overhead of causal tracing renders it impractical to calculate CE for different unlearning datasets. Therefore, we execute causal tracing only once per model 

using “1,000 factual statements [40].” Since this dataset con-tains a wide range of knowledge domains, the calculated CE scores exhibit generalizability across topics and thus can be reused to mitigate requirements for causal tracing in future unlearning tasks. 

Selection Strategy. Based on empirical investigation, we ob-serve that though with high CE FFN scores, KUDA is sensitive to the layer positions. Concretely, the first several layers of the FFN-dominant zone primarily handle generic features [28], while those layers located at its terminus facilitate the func-tional transition from knowledge retrieval to semantics aggre-gation, rendering both of them ill-suited as unlearning layers. Besides, contiguous layers should be prioritized to preserve the coherence of the representation space across layers. See Section C.1 for more detailed analysis. Therefore, we design a sliding window search strategy to select unlearning layers, as presented in Algorithm 1. First, we construct a candidate set Stop containing N layers with the highest CE lFFN scores, ordered by layer indices. Starting from the median layer of Stop and iterating toward the deeper layers, we treat a candidate layer as a centric anchor to bi-directionally expand a sliding window Wj,s of size s. The layers within Wj,s are selected as Unlearning Layers only if 

Wj,s meets the Hit Ratio (HR) condition: HR (Wj,s) = |Wj,s ∩ Stop |

s > 0.5 (2) With a majority-principle threshold of 0.5 , the HR constraint ensures that the window is mainly composed of layers with significant contributions to knowledge storage, filtering out isolated outliers. 

## 4.4 Knowledge Representation Deviation 

As discussed in Section 4.1, input tokens activate knowledge stored in specific FFNs during generation, establishing asso-ciations that are then incorporated, along with the semantic context of inputs, into the hidden representations [18, 40]. For instance, given the input “Apple CEO,” the representations of specific layers might contain the association with “Tim Cook,” which is the implicit knowledge stored in FFNs and triggered by the input context. Such knowledge associations refine the information of representations and are subsequently extracted by MHSA to influence the final output [17]. Therefore, dis-rupting these associations in representations can effectively inhibit the generation of target knowledge, achieving the goal of unlearning. To this end, we design the representation-based objectives for target knowledge removal. 

Forgetting Loss. Inspired by preference optimization [50,78], we design a deviation mechanism to push the representation of forgetting knowledge away from its original state. Once the hidden representations are perturbed from their pre-trained state, the incorporated associations with relevant knowledge can no longer be effectively utilized by subsequent layers. While preference optimization relies on the similarity of model outputs, the lack of a direct mapping between hidden representations and outputs calls for a substitute metric to quantify the similarity of representations. To address this is-sue, we adopt cosine similarity between representations of the unlearning model and the original ones. Given the high dimensionality and sparsity of representations, cosine sim-ilarity is particularly well-suited, as it measures direction consistency rather than magnitude and is robust to sparse acti-vation patterns. Besides, its value transition of 1 −→ 0 provides a mathematical implication of “reducing similarity.” This process effectively drives the representation away from its original state, intuitively aligning with the goal of preference optimization. Furthermore, we adopt the cosine complement 

(1 − cos ), which enables similarity reduction while simulta-neously ensuring the training objective remains convergent. Accordingly, we refine preference optimization by integrating the aforementioned designs to construct the forgetting objec-tive, which induces deliberate deviation in the representations of forgetting knowledge: 

Lf = − 2

β ED f

h

log σ



β ·



1 − cos R l′

> un

(x), R l′

> ori

(x)

i 

(3) where x ∈ Df are the forgetting data, cos ⟨·⟩ denotes the cosine similarity, and σ(·) refers to the sigmoid function. The hy-perparameter β represents the inverse unlearning temperature. Notably, R l′ 

> un

and R l′ 

> ori

denote the representations at the last un-learning layer l′ from the unlearning and the original models. Since knowledge is distributed across layers and aggregated through residual connections, the representation at layer l′

integrates a substantial amount of forgetting knowledge and corresponding associations. This makes it a principled choice 6as the target in Lf .Briefly, the minimization of Lf serves to reduce similar-ity cos ⟨·⟩ between the current and original representations. This derives a deviation of the target knowledge representa-tion from its pre-trained state, which inhibits the subsequent generation of that knowledge. 

Retaining Loss. Update gradients derived from Lf often lead to severe degradation of model utility, thus necessitating the incorporation of constraints to ensure a controllable un-learning process [66]. In contrast to output-level unlearning losses that typically employ KL-divergence or cross-entropy to restrict changes in the token probability distributions, these common constraint terms are incompatible with hidden repre-sentations, which reside in a continuous vector space rather than a discrete probability space. Consequently, we adopt an ℓ2-regularization item [8] on Dr to effectively penalize excessive deviations within the latent representation space: 

Lr = EDr

h

# ℓ2

 R l′

> un

(x), R l′

> ori

(x)i

, (4) where x ∈ Dr are the retaining data, and other symbols are consistent with those defined in Lf . Beyond preserving fac-tual knowledge, Dr is also essential for retaining the structural knowledge, such as grammatical and syntactic patterns, that form the foundation of the model’s excellent linguistic capa-bilities [52]. 

Unlearning Loss. The final unlearning loss is formulated as the composite of forgetting and retaining objectives, which are responsible for knowledge removal and utility retention, respectively: 

Lu = Lf + Lr (5) In contrast to conventional methods, we discard the scaling factor ( i.e. , Lf + α · Lr) that is typically employed to balance forgetting and retention. In practice, due to the difference in loss functions and task requirements, the tuning effect of such hyperparameters might be non-linear, and substantially in-creases the cost of hyperparameter searching in specific tasks. This complexity diminishes the adaptability across diverse unlearning scenarios. We will elaborate on its fundamental limitation and our improvement in Section 4.5. 

Parameter Update. According to Section 2.1, the last lin-ear transformation matrix Wout (referred to as Wdown in some LLMs, such as Llama) in FFNs serves a crucial role in knowl-edge association. Therefore, we intervene in the association process to achieve unlearning by applying parameter updates 

∇wLu exclusively to Wout of FFNs across all unlearning lay-ers , as knowledge is distributed in multiple layers [18]. This selective refinement enables precise removal of target knowl-edge while preserving model utility. 

## 4.5 Relaxation Null-Space Projection 

As shown in Section 2.3, null-space has the property of invari-ance , motivating us to adopt this in reconciling the conflicts between two unlearning targets. 

Drawbacks of Scaling Factor. The most representative paradigm for utility retention involves incorporating the retain-ing loss and employs a scaling factor to achieve the trade-off between forgetting and retention, i.e. , Lf + α · Lr. However, previous studies [66,70,78] have revealed its limited effective-ness in preventing the utility degradation, due to the failure to reconcile the conflict between forgetting and retention. A crucial issue arises when any component of unlearning gra-dients acts in opposition to the retention direction, as such a component inevitably compromises model utility. This stems from the directional conflict that cannot be resolved by merely adjusting the magnitude of gradients through a scaling factor 

α.These limitations motivate a subspace transformation mech-anism to eliminate the detrimental influence of gradient com-ponents on model utility. The invariance property of null-space provides a solution. Concretely, we project gradients 

∇wl Lu into the null-space of the input feature of Dr at layer 

l. This remains the representations of retaining knowledge 

invariant despite updated parameters, as introduced in Sec-tion 2.3. 

Input Feature Capturing. First, we compute the uncentered covariance statistic of k to characterize the input feature space of retaining knowledge in Wout , where k is the input of Wout 

as described in Section 2.1. The covariance captures correla-tions across feature dimensions. Concretely, we input retain-ing data xr ∈ Dr to the original model to get the input klr of 

W lout across all unlearning layers. The uncentered covariance statistic K lr ∈ Rd×d is denoted as the input feature space and formulated as: 

K lr = 1

nr ∑nr

> i=1

(klr,i)⊤klr,i (6) However, this phase requires |Dr| times of forward passes to capture the input features, which limits the scalability in the practical large-scale retaining dataset. Therefore, we pro-pose Stochastic Proportional Sampling , which constructs an approximate input feature space using a sampled subset ˆDr:ˆDr = {xri | i ∼ Uniform (1, |Dr|), s.t. | ˆDr| = p% · | Dr|} , (7) where p is the sampling ratio. This stochasticity ensures the statistical representativeness of the captured feature distri-bution, while the proportional sampling effectively reduces computational overhead by reducing the number of required forward passes. 

Null-Space Relaxation. Next, we apply singular value de-composition (SVD) to K lr to identify feature directions that are uncorrelated with retaining knowledge: 

Ul , Λl , (Ul )⊤ = SVD (K lr ), (8) where the subset of singular vectors Ul 

> z

⊂ Ul , correspond-ing to zero singular values, constitute the strict null-space .7Then, the gradients are projected into the null-space of re-taining knowledge via the strict null-space projection matrix Uzl (Ul 

> z

)⊤. However, given the representation entanglement 

between the forgetting and retaining knowledge, such a strict projection matrix inadvertently constrains the updates to rep-resentations of forgetting knowledge, thereby hindering the thorough removal. To this end, we introduce a null-space relaxation threshold 

τ to relax the strict zero-singular-value constraint. Specifically, we construct an approximate null-space by selecting singular vectors whose corresponding singular values fall below τ:

N l 

> τ

=

n

uli | λli < τ, λli ∈ Λ, uli ∈ Ul o

, (9) Based on this, the Relaxation Null-Space Projection Matrix is then defined as Pl 

> τ

= N l 

> τ

(N l 

> τ

)⊤ ∈ Rd×d. This tolerates updates in directions weakly correlated with retaining knowledge, thus removing target knowledge without incurring significant degradation to utility. 

Gradients Projection. Finally, before updating parameters, we project the gradients into the relaxation null-space of re-taining knowledge with Pτ, ensuring that the update gradients do not interfere with content generation related to retaining knowledge: 

∇′ 

> wl

Lu = Pl 

> τ

· ∇wl Lu, (10) where ∇′ 

> wl

Lu is adopted to update W lout at layer l for unlearn-ing. 

## 4.6 Principled Hyperparameter Configuration 

The unlearning performance of KUDA is mainly influenced by the inverse unlearning temperature ( β) and the null-space relaxation threshold ( τ). β controls the intensity of forgetting and enhances knowledge removal when decreasing. A smaller 

τ results in feature directions less correlated with retaining knowledge, thereby enhancing utility retention while weak-ening forgetting. As such, we propose a two-stage tuning 

strategy for practical deployment: 1) Stability Boundary Identification. We fix β = 0.1 to enforce a state of over-forgetting. Maintaining maximal forgetting, we decrease τ to identify an inflection point, at or below which knowledge removal is substantially weak-ened, as illustrated in Figure 9. We designate this specific 

τ as the stability boundary , with further details provided in Section C.2. 2) Unlearning Balance. Building upon the identified bound-ary, we select a τ slightly larger than this boundary to ensure the effectiveness of removal, and then increase β

across {0.1, 1.0, 2.0}. This process mitigates forgetting in-tensity to balance knowledge removal and utility retention. The principled strategy prioritizes the stability boundary of representation space under an extreme forgetting scenario and then refines the unlearning balance, thereby transform-ing a complex joint optimization into two sequential one-dimensional searches. 

## 5 Evaluation 5.1 Experimental Setup 

There are multiple well-established benchmarks for eval-uating the performance of various LLM unlearning algo-rithms. These benchmarks incorporate a set of datasets, met-rics, and models. In this paper, we evaluate the performance of KUDA on two representative benchmarks, MUSE [58] and WMDP [32]. 

Datasets. The datasets consist of forgetting set and retaining set .• MUSE. It consists of two datasets, BOOKS and NEWS. For BOOKS, the forgetting set comprises text excerpts from the Harry Potter series, while the retaining set is sampled from the Harry Potter Fandom Wiki. For NEWS, the forgetting and retaining sets are constructed by randomly partitioning BBC News articles published after August 2023. • WMDP. It focuses on the malicious misuse of hazardous knowledge in LLMs, aiming to evaluate the ability to re-move dangerous knowledge from models. Its forgetting set comprises harmful knowledge in Biosecurity (Bio) and Cy-bersecurity (Cyber), collected from GitHub and PubMed, respectively. The retaining set is from Wikitext [42]. 

Models. We need two models to evaluate the performance of unlearning methods: The “origin” model is the starting point of the unlearning process and serves as the performance ceiling for retention. The “retrain” model denotes the golden baseline and provides an upper-bound reference for forgetting. • MUSE. It adopts ICLM -7B [59] and Llama -2 - 7B as “re-train” models for the BOOKS and NEWS, respectively. Since neither of their pre-training corpora includes MUSE datasets, they can be approximately considered equivalent to retrained. These models are then fine-tuned on MUSE datasets to obtain “origin” models, which are released on Hugging Face. • WMDP. It adopts Zephyr-7B-Beta as the “origin” model, and we extend to modern models, such as Llama -3.1 -8B and Qwen3-8B. Notably, a “retrain” model is unavailable due to the widespread distribution of hazardous knowledge across training corpora. 

Metrics. Different benchmarks design their own metrics based on the unique characteristics of datasets. These metrics can be broadly classified into two categories: forgetting qual-ity (FQ) and retaining utility (RU). Due to the space limitation, we defer the formal definition of these metrics to Section B.1. 8Table 1: The comprehensive unlearning performance comparison between ours and baselines on MUSE, evaluating the forgetting quality and retaining utility from multiple dimensions. KRD represents the overall effectiveness of forgetting, and KnowMem in 

Dr reflects the retention performance. The best results in Forgetting Quality and Retaining Utility are highlighted in bold , and the suboptimal ones are marked with an underline.    

> Unlearning Method Forgetting Quality Retaining Utility Forgetting Quality Retaining Utility
> VerbMem

Df ↓

> KnowMem

Df ↓  

> PrivLeak
> →0
> KRD
> →1
> KnowMem

Dr ↑

> VerbMem

Df ↓

> KnowMem

Df ↓  

> PrivLeak
> →0
> KRD
> →1
> KnowMem

Dr ↑                                                                                 

> BOOKS NEWS
> Origin 99.59 58.76 56.68 0.0000 67.00 58.42 63.41 99.84 0.0000 54.96 Retrain 14.35 28.90 0.00 1.0000 74.38 20.80 33.30 0.00 1.0000 54.68 GA 11.00 23.96 40.50 0.5452 34.24 4.95 31.08 108.10 0.0002 27.33 NPO 20.13 27.68 41.35 0.5200 44.75 7.60 54.62 105.79 0.0003 41.27 WHP 19.04 51.49 51.56 0.1849 63.47 17.15 23.17 97.56 0.0658 29.90 SimNPO 0.00 3.24 17.15 0.8737 49.55 13.21 47.82 11.75 0.7380 40.66 RMU 7.04 30.92 20.45 0.8248 58.37 18.14 32.31 93.77 0.1627 38.95
> KUDA 0.05 26.73 16.55 0.8792 61.97 8.71 0.26 20.09 0.9523 53.08

• MUSE. For FQ , MUSE designs three metrics ( VerbMem ,

KnowMem on Df , and PrivLeak ). The first two metrics reflect the ability to reproduce training data and to answer questions related to forgetting knowledge. When values are lower than those of the “retrain” model, forgetting is con-sidered completed. Besides, a value closer to 0 is preferred for PrivLeak, reflecting good defense against membership inference attacks (MIA). Regarding RU , MUSE utilizes 

KnowMem on Dr, and the value closer to the “origin” model indicates better retention. • WMDP. It evaluates FQ with Answer Acc (Acc) on multi-choice test sets. 25% is the ideal result, indicating that the model lacks cognition of dangerous knowledge and thus answers at random. Besides, WMDP adopts MMLU [21], a multi-domain benchmark covering STEM and humani-ties, among other disciplines, to assess RU of broad world knowledge. The score closer to that of the “origin” model reflects better retention of general knowledge. The evaluation for RU is straightforward, while the metrics for FQ are multi-dimensional. Therefore, we propose knowl-edge removal degree (KRD) , a harmonic mean of forgetting metrics, to quantify the overall forgetting performance. When any metric indicates poor forgetting, KRD tends towards 0; otherwise, it approaches 1: KRD = n

∑ni=1 1˜FQ i

, (11) where ˜FQ i is the specific metric to assess forgetting in differ-ent benchmarks, such as VerbMem in MUSE, and is adjusted to eliminate the disruption of over-forgetting. We detail the adjustment process in Section B.1. 

Competitors. We compare with a series of representative methods: GA [27], NPO [78], SimNPO [14], and the SOTA method RMU [32]. All methods are implemented with Grad-Diff (GD) [74]. For other baselines, we conduct WHP [12] in MUSE. See Section B.2 for more implementation details. 

## 5.2 Overall Unlearning Performance 

We evaluate KUDA on MUSE and WMDP, and quantify unlearning performance in terms of forgetting quality and retaining utility. 

Performance on MUSE. Table 1 presents the results on MUSE. In general, KUDA demonstrates outstanding effec-tiveness of knowledge removal in both BOOKS and NEWS. The optimal KRD values indicate the comprehensive for-getting capabilities, ranging from the deletion of verbatim memorization to privacy protection. Concretely, KUDA sig-nificantly reduces both VerbMem and KnowMem on Df be-low those of the “retrain” model, suggesting that the LLM’s capacity to utilize the target forgetting knowledge for text generation has been effectively suppressed. In contrast, WHP, NPO, and SimNPO only weaken the model’s ability to re-produce specific training text, reflecting superficial forgetting. Besides, it can be observed that KUDA also shows great im-provement in PrivLeak, only slightly underperforming Sim-NPO in NEWS. This reveals that the model unlearned by KUDA can effectively defend against MIA, demonstrating solid capabilities of privacy protection. Furthermore, KUDA achieves a great balance between for-getting effectiveness and model utility retention. In NEWS, KUDA minimizes degradation in retaining utility while achieving maximal knowledge removal. In BOOKS, although slightly weaker than WHP in retention, KUDA presents sig-nificant forgetting effectiveness, indicating a more balanced unlearning performance; In comparison, WHP yields a model with a state close to “not forgetting.” Notably, GA thoroughly removes target knowledge via over-forgetting [58], but at 9Table 2: The unlearning performance comparison between ours and baselines on WMDP. Acc-Bio and Acc-Cyber denote the answer accuracy on different test sets. Acc-Avg denotes the weighted average accuracy, with the weights determined by the number of questions in each set. Other definitions are consistent with those of Table 1.                                                                    

> Method Forgetting Quality Retaining Utility
> Acc-Bio ↓Acc-Cyber ↓Acc-Avg ↓KRD →1MMLU ↑
> Zephyr-7B-Beta
> Origin 63.82 43.78 51.60 0.0000 58.13 GA 27.06 26.82 26.92 0.9244 33.02 NPO 42.93 36.34 38.91 0.6813 45.71 SimNPO 39.61 33.79 36.06 0.5741 48.26 RMU 29.22 27.93 28.43 0.8665 56.90
> KUDA 29.92 26.82 28.03 0.8879 57.14 Llama-3.1-8B
> Origin 59.62 41.87 48.80 0.0000 63.31 RMU 30.00 26.27 27.73 0.8888 58.33
> KUDA 29.22 25.00 26.28 0.9350 60.64 Qwen-3-8B
> Origin 74.16 45.14 56.47 0.0000 73.01 RMU 36.52 34.35 35.30 0.6304 60.02
> KUDA 28.43 26.17 27.05 0.9360 68.92

the cost of severely compromising model utility and even in-creasing vulnerability to MIA. From the perspective, KUDA reveals that its unlearning mechanism dives into knowledge encoded in LLMs, without excessive destruction to model utility. Moreover, RMU presents strong performance in both for-getting and retention. However, KUDA excels further in dataset generalization, comprehensive knowledge removal, and utility preservation. 

Performance on WMDP. In Table 2, we present the perfor-mances on WMDP. In general, KUDA achieves both effec-tive forgetting and strong utility retention. It removes 88 .8% hazardous knowledge stored in Zephyr-7B-Beta, with only a negligible 1.3% drop in retaining utility. Notably, it main-tains better performance than RMU, even though RMU is the SOTA method on this benchmark. As for other baselines, GA leads to severe degradation in retaining utility for achieving forgetting. NPO and its variant SimNPO struggle to eliminate the LLM’s ability to utilize dangerous knowledge, as observed in the experiments of MUSE. Fan et al. [14] attribute this to the primary focus of NPO on aligning text-level responses, instead of the knowledge encoded in parameters. In contrast, KUDA achieves multi-dimensional unlearning. Furthermore, since the “origin” model for WMDP does not require dataset-specific fine-tuning, we extend our experi-ments to more modern architectures, Llama-3.1 and Qwen-3. In subsequent experiments, we only compare with RMU, as 

Figure 3: t-SNE visualization of representations on Wikitext and MUSE-News. both KUDA and RMU substantially outperform all other base-lines. Overall, KUDA consistently surpasses RMU, particularly on Qwen-3. Both the Zephyr and Llama series originate from the Llama architecture family, sharing high similarity in model design and compatibility. In contrast, Qwen-3 in-corporates architectural innovations such as QK-Norm and a deeper stack of layers. We attribute RMU’s limited transfer-ability primarily to poor compatibility to these architectural differences. Therefore, this demonstrates the robust model generalization capability of KUDA. 

Retention Transferability. We further observe that KUDA mitigates the reliance on the knowledge distribution of the retaining set to some extent. It avoids significant degradation in the model’s factual cognition on general knowledge, even when Dr is semantically unrelated to them. Concretely, we perform unlearning with domain-specific retaining sets Dr,including articles on biology and cybersecurity, Harry Pot-ter–related content, and BBC news. Then we adopt MMLU to assess the unlearned models’ cognition of multi-domain world knowledge. Across all datasets, KRD scores exceed 0.9, while MMLU scores show only minor degradation: 58 .13 → 55 .50 (Zephyr-7B-Beta), 36 .81 → 36 .23 (MUSE-NEWS “origin” model), and 26 .52 → 25 .97 (MUSE-BOOKS “origin” model). The t-SNE analysis in Figure 3 reveals the inseparability be-tween the representations of these domain-specific knowledge instances and those from Wikitext, which covers general-domain knowledge. Therefore, when KUDA applies null-space to mitigate the adverse impact on the representations of domain-specific retaining knowledge, it inadvertently pre-serves the representations of multi-domain general knowl-edge. 

## 5.3 Mechanism Analysis 

We aim to investigate the underlying reasons why KUDA achieves a better balance between knowledge removal and utility retention than other unlearning baselines. Therefore, we conduct a mechanistic analysis experiment from the per-spective of gradient dynamics .10 Table 3: The unlearning performance on WMDP-Augment using a domain-adjacent but benign Dr relative to Df .                 

> Method Forgetting Quality Retaining Utility
> Acc-Bio ↓Acc-Cyber ↓Acc-Avg ↓KRD →1MMLU ↑
> RMU 33.22 26.57 29.17 0.8475 51.85
> KUDA 32.00 26.50 28.70 0.8670 54.50

Setup. Previous studies [66, 70] have identified the optimiza-tion challenge in gradient-based unlearning methods: the gradients of Lf and Lr mutually impede each other during the parameter updates. This highlights the essence of non-conflicting gradients for successful unlearning. Based on the insight, we design an experiment focusing on gradient con-flicts to elucidate the unlearning mechanism of KUDA. We conduct experiments on WMDP and change the origi-nal Dr Wikitext. With the knowledge independent of cyber-or bio-related hazardous content in Df , Wikitext avoids sig-nificant conflicts between forgetting and retention objectives, thereby facilitating a high-quality unlearning balance. To mag-nify the optimization conflicts, we construct a stringent sce-nario by using Dr that consists of benign knowledge, which is semantically adjacent to Df . We compare with RMU, the SOTA method in WMDP, and tune hyperparameters until the RMU-unlearned and KUDA-unlearned models achieve comparable forgetting quality. To prevent over-forgetting, we ensure that both models achieve scores above 25 on the Bio and Cyber evaluation tests. Throughout training, we record the cosine similarity between the gradients of Lf and Lr,and convert it to the angular value in degrees for intuitive interpretability. 

Observations. Table 3 exhibits a comparable forgetting qual-ity, and RMU incurs more severe degradation of model utility. This indicates that KUDA allows more precise and targeted knowledge removal, even when it is removed from seman-tically proximate or related knowledge domains. Figure 4 shows the evolution of gradient angles, further revealing the underlying mechanism behind the above observations from the perspective of gradient alignment. The gradient angles of RMU predominantly fall within the range of 90 ◦ ∼ 120 ◦, particularly in the early and middle phases. This suggests a severe imbalance between conflicting objectives, leading to an increased risk of collapse in model utility. This may stem from the design of RMU’s losses (see introduction in Section 3.2), which employs symmetric MSE for both forgetting and retention, and is thus prone to gradient conflicts. In contrast, KUDA presents more stable gradient dynam-ics, with the gradient angles between Lf and Lr fluctuating around 90 ◦. This illustrates that KUDA, as a gradient-based method, inherently maintains near-orthogonal alignment be-tween forgetting and retaining gradients during unlearning. Therefore, it avoids the dilemma of optimization conflicts posed by antagonistic interference, thus eliminating the need to compromise the model utility for knowledge removal. We attribute this advantage to the synergy effect of well-designed unlearning losses and relaxation null-space projection. 

## 5.4 Hyperparameter Analysis 

We further evaluate the impact of two critical hyperparameters and support our guidance for hyperparameter search. 

Setup. We adopt WMDP for hyperparameter analysis due to the well-curated data scale and evaluation efficiency, which enable rapid iteration over variant configurations. We vary inverse unlearning temperature β over a set of {0.1, 1.0, 2.0},sample five values for null-space relaxation threshold τ from the range 3 × 10 −4 ∼ 3 × 10 −3, and then conduct a cross-combination study over these hyperparameters. Preliminary experiments are deferred to Section C.2. 

Impact of Inverse Unlearning Temperature β. Figure 5 presents a heatmap of the hyperparameter experiment results, where darker shades denote better performance. It can be ob-served that the choice of β significantly affects the unlearning performance: smaller values of β lead to stronger knowledge removal but at the cost of degrading the model utility reten-tion. Moreover, the impact of β on forgetting exhibits a similar tendency across different values of τ.These results correspond to our method, where β controls the step size of the forgetting process. In general, as β in-creases, the divergence degree gradually weakens. This leads to a gradual reduction in the intensity of knowledge removal, with the unlearned model tending toward a state of “weak forgetting.” Correspondingly, the retaining utility improves progressively, approaching that of the “origin” model. 

Impact of Null-Space Relaxation Threshold τ. As shown in Figure 5, decreasing τ significantly enhances retaining utility while gradually weakening forgetting effectiveness. Notably, the retaining utility is sensitive to variations in β under a large 

τ; however, this sensitivity declines and turns to robustness against β variations once τ drops below a certain value. We identify the specific τ as “ stability boundary ”, at or below which the forgetting process is significantly suppressed, as presented in Figure 9 of Section C.2. The observed trend aligns with our predictions, confirming that τ influences the trade-off between forgetting and reten-tion. Specifically, τ dictates the singular value filtering range, thus controlling the selection of singular vectors used to con-struct the approximate null-space. Lower values of τ mean fewer singular vectors, which typically correspond to feature directions with minimal contribution to the representation space. Therefore, the null-space becomes weakly correlated with the representations of retaining knowledge. Due to the entanglement discussed in Section 4.5, projecting gradients into this subspace limits perturbation to retaining knowledge, while it also constrains knowledge removal. The interaction 11 0

> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> 125
> 150
> 175
> RMU, Layer 4
> 90° Reference
> RMU, Layer 5
> 90° Reference
> RMU, Layer 6
> 90° Reference
> RMU, Layer 7
> 90° Reference
> 0
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> 125
> 150
> 175
> KUDA, Layer 4
> 90° Reference
> KUDA, Layer 5
> 90° Reference
> KUDA, Layer 6
> 90° Reference
> KUDA, Layer 7
> 90° Reference

Figure 4: Evolution of angles between two gradients during the unlearning with RMU and KUDA. We trained on WMDP for 600 steps, showcasing the gradient angle fluctuations throughout the entire process. 3.0e-04                         

> 5.0e-04
> 8.0e-04
> 1.0e-03
> 3.0e-03
> 0.1
> 1.0
> 2.0
> 0.2119 0.5842 0.7721 0.8494 0.9973
> 0.1157 0.4788 0.6672 0.7484 0.9620
> 0.0258 0.2394 0.4461 0.7485 0.8989
> 3.0e-04
> 5.0e-04
> 8.0e-04
> 1.0e-03
> 3.0e-03
> 0.1
> 1.0
> 2.0
> 57.91 57.60 57.83 57.19 43.61
> 57.63 58.00 58.15 57.42 47.70
> 57.90 57.98 58.28 57.71 56.40
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 44
> 46
> 48
> 50
> 52
> 54
> 56
> 58

Figure 5: Unlearning performance heatmap across different hyperparameter combinations of β (vertical axis) and τ (hor-izontal axis). The left plot presents forgetting quality with KRD, and the right one shows retaining utility via MMLU score. Darker colors indicate better performance. explains why τ affects KUDA’s sensitivity to the changes of 

β.

Summary. Based on the comprehensive analysis, we identify the observations: (1) Decreasing β strengthens the forget-ting intensity and leads to more aggressive removal of target knowledge; (2) Decreasing τ improves retaining utility with the cost of reduced forgetting effectiveness; (3) Knowledge removal is suppressed if τ is at or below the stability boundary. (4) When τ falls below stability boundary, changes in β yield limited influence on retention. These observations reveal the coupled impact of β and τ,where both hyperparameters concurrently modulate the trade-off between knowledge removal and utility retention. Beyond their direct influence on unlearning, τ further regulates the impact from variations of β. This interdependence highlights the necessity of our two-stage tuning strategy that simplifies the complex joint optimization into two decoupled linear processes. Moreover, Observation (3) refines the strategy that 

Figure 6: Unlearning performance across different unlearning layers. The horizontal axis shows the unlearning layers. i ∼ j

denotes that all layers from i to j are designated as unlearning layers, and “w/o k” means the excluded layer k.

τ should moderately increase if adjusting β yields a negligible impact. 

## 5.5 Ablation Study 

We also conduct ablation experiments to verify the effective-ness of KUDA’s components. 

Effectiveness of Layer Selection. We set five baselines to validate layer selection: (1) Depth-based layers comprising Shallow ( l3 ∼ l6), Middle ( l12 ∼ l15 ), and Deep ( l21 ∼ l24 )layers; and (2) Functional partitions, focusing on the FFN-dominant ( l3 ∼ l9) and MHSA-dominant ( l15 ∼ l18 ) zones as shown in Figure 7. Figure 6 demonstrates that KUDA is position-sensitive to the unlearning layers, with randomized selections at various layer depths for comparison. Particularly, although the middle and deep layers aggregate knowledge via residual streams, they fail to effectively remove knowledge. Besides, our layer selection strategy achieves a functional decoupling between 12 FFN 

> Attn

Figure 7: Visualization of causal effect on Zephyr-7B-Beta. The left plot presents the layers with Top-10 causal effect in FFN components. The right panels present the global causal effects, with darker colors indicating stronger causal effects. Table 4: The forgetting quality and retaining utility of un-learned models with different loss functions ( LRMU and 

LKUDA ), GradDiff (GD), and Null-Space Projection (NSP). WMDP-Augment uses adjacent, benign knowledge as Dr.     

> Dataset Method Forgetting Quality ↓Retaining Utility ↑
> WMDP-Augment

LRMU + GD 28.17 51.85 

LRMU + NSP 27.45 51.22 

LKUDA + GD 28.60 52.48 

LKUDA + NSP 27.40 55.50 

> MUSE-BOOKS

LRMU + GD 30.92 58.37 

LRMU + NSP 34.58 53.60 

LKUDA + GD 31.67 55.95 

LKUDA + NSP 32.48 63.11 

the FFN-dominant zone and the MHSA-dominant zone, as presented Figure 7. The results in Figure 6 indicate that this decoupling enables knowledge removal without compromis-ing the models’ core utility. Notably, we observe a robust layer selection interval ( l4 ∼ l9) that consistently yields supe-rior performance, with minor trade-off fluctuations between forgetting and retention. All layers within the interval have high CE FFN , and layers identified by our strategy also reside in. 

Effectiveness of Knowledge Representation Deviation Loss. To verify the necessity of the KUDA loss, we substitute it with LRMU and compare the retaining utility at a compara-ble level of forgetting quality. To simplify the analysis, we adopt average weighted answer accuracy and MMLU scores on WMDP, along with KnowMem in Df and Dr on MUSE, as intuitive metrics to quantify forgetting quality and retaining utility, respectively. Table 4 indicates the better compatibility between LKUDA 

and null-space projection than LRMU , with their synergy ef-fectively improving both knowledge removal and utility re-tention. This suggests that the asymmetric design of LKUDA 

serves as a fundamental prerequisite that allows relaxation null-space projection to retain model utility without hindering knowledge removal. 

Effectiveness of Null-space Projection. Given that null-space projection serves as an enhancement to GradDiff, we Table 5: The time cost in HH:MM:SS format, with 4 unlearning layers. The cost of parameter update denotes one epoch, and the update without projection is also reported.                

> Dataset Model Causal Tracing Input Feature SVD Update Update w/o Projection WMDP
> Zephry-7B-Beta 2:10:23 0:02:40 0:09:40 0:05:57 0:04:28 Llama-3.1-8B 2:57:00 0:04:16 0:09:33 0:08:21 0:06:25 Qwen3-8B 2:41:45 0:02:32 0:18:32 0:08:17 0:06:34
> BOOKS ICLM-7B 2:21:06 0:00:32 0:04:08 0:12:23 0:11:18
> NEWS Llama-2-7B 1:50:24 0:03:04 0:04:12 0:09:05 0:08:25

adopted it for comparison. The baseline unlearning loss is formulated as Lu = Lf + α · Lr, where α is the scaling factor. Other settings are consistent with those described in the above part. Table 4 demonstrates that, under the loss of KUDA, null-space projection outperforms GradDiff in balancing the for-getting and retention, consistently across different datasets and models. Particularly, at comparable forgetting quality, null-space projection significantly improves retention perfor-mance. We attribute this to its ability to alleviate optimiza-tion conflicts through subspace transformations, rather than merely adjusting the relative magnitudes of gradients with a scaling factor. Therefore, it eliminates the adverse influence of the update gradients on the representation space of retaining knowledge. 

## 5.6 Efficiency Analysis 

Computational Overhead. Table 5 presents the computa-tional overhead of KUDA, identifying “causal tracing” as the primary bottleneck. However, as discussed in Section 4.3, this phase is a one-time offline operation for each model, with the selected unlearning layers being reusable across var-ious datasets. The computational cost of SVD is primarily determined by the dimensionality of the input features, but remains acceptable when restricted to a few unlearning layers. Moreover, the additional overhead introduced by the projec-tion during parameter updates is marginal across models and unlearning tasks. In general, KUDA introduces acceptable additional over-head, which remains stable and does not scale significantly with the size or complexity of the unlearning tasks. How-ever, the computational overhead of “Input Feature Capture” scales linearly with the size of Dr, leaving an issue we address specifically in the following. 

Sample Strategy. To mitigate the computational bottleneck caused by “Input Feature Capture” under a large-scale dataset, we propose stochastic proportional sampling in Section 4.5 to construct an approximate input feature space using a sampled 13 Figure 8: Impact of sampling ratio. The left plot shows the result of eigendecomposition, in descending order on a loga-rithmic scale. The right plot presents forgetting quality (top) and retaining utility (bottom), under different sampling ratios and tuning τ.subset ˆDr. A critical consideration is whether such a sampling strategy preserves the information integrity of input features, or if it leads to a degradation in the effectiveness of null-space due to potential information loss. We conduct a comprehensive analysis with different sam-pling ratios p and a large-scale corpus with 61,000 samples, following basic unlearning evaluations and spectral decom-position analysis on the input feature spaces. As presented in Figure 8, the high consistency of eigenvalue spectra confirms that stochastic sampling effectively captures the primary in-formation and core distribution of the original representation space. Since relaxation null-space projection primarily tar-gets preserving these dominant features, the inevitable minor information loss only induces variations in the construction of null-space, without compromising its protection function. Figure 8 confirms that near-optimal unlearning performance can be achieved across ratios p through minor adjustments of τ, while reducing the overhead to p 

> 100

of the original one, thus balancing computational efficiency with the unlearning effectiveness. 

## 6 Related Work 6.1 LLM Unlearning 

LLM unlearning is an extension of machine unlearning [2 –5] that is specifically applied to LLMs, to remove undesired knowledge from a pre-trained LLM without full retrain-ing [36, 52]. Representative methods for LLM unlearning pri-marily rely on parameter modifications . This includes full pa-rameter updates based on specific forgetting losses [14,27,78], which often incorporate retaining losses to balance for-getting and retention [74], serving as the foundational ap-proach. To pursue higher efficiency and balance, some stud-ies focus on identifying parameters correlated to target knowledge [30, 46, 72]. However, these are computation-ally expensive, restricting practical applicability. Besides, re-searchers explore partial parameter updates based on activa-tions steering [32, 55], but the effectiveness of forgetting is limited [13, 73]. In contrast to parameter modifications, the external inter-vention methods introduce external components to interfere with the generation process, such as context fine-tuning [59], or by adding perturbations to input embeddings [35] or output logits [29]. Therefore, these methods control the model to exhibit “unlearning” behavior without updating the model parameters. However, these only achieve unlearning at the be-havioral level, failing to remove the target knowledge encoded within the model’s parameters. This renders such methods vulnerable to the risk of target knowledge being extracted from the model’s intermediate representations [62]. These approaches are excluded from our discussion and evaluation because they do not fulfill the fundamental requirement of LLM unlearning, specifically the removal of targeted knowl-edge. Therefore, they are considered distinct from the scope of our research. 

## 6.2 LLM Unlearning Verification 

The validation of unlearning effectiveness deserves attention, as it is not only essential for providing a unified evaluation framework but also a critical step toward enabling the practical deployment of unlearning. A central criterion is to construct a golden baseline model as a reference, which approximates retraining on the retaining dataset [52]. Benchmarks such as TOFU [39] and MUSE [58] build forgetting sets from corpora published after the release of specific models. These models serve as golden baselines, as they have no exposure to the for-getting set, while models fine-tuned on the datasets are treated as the starting point of unlearning models. WMDP [32] con-structs a multi-choice question set centered on hazardous knowledge and establishes a human-defined criterion as the ideal performance of a golden baseline. Additionally, it uti-lizes MMLU [21] to evaluate the LLMs’ retention of general knowledge. Regarding evaluation metrics, researchers focus on the balance between forgetting quality and retaining utility, often assessed by the form of question-answering [32, 39, 58]. 

## 6.3 Attacks against LLM Unlearning 

The robustness of an unlearned LLM against adversarial at-tacks is also a critical aspect for ensuring practical applicabil-ity [36]. On one hand, existing attacks aim to extract forgotten knowledge by exploiting residual memory through adversar-ial attacks [79] or backdoor triggers [26]. On the other hand, the adversary recovers the forgotten knowledge through spe-cific prompts [77] that simply emphasize certain keywords in the prompts. Notably, even without access to the forgetting set, the supposedly removed information can be restored by fine-tuning on retaining sets [24] or even on unrelated down-14 stream tasks [64]. These reveal the vulnerability of existing knowledge-removal-intended methods, indicating that they tend to obscure knowledge rather than remove it [52]. 

## 6.4 Application of LLM Unlearning 

Explorations across diverse application domains have re-vealed a broad potential of LLM unlearning, including the re-moval of privacy-sensitive training data encoded in LLMs [7, 27,72], the suppression of harmful content generation [32,37], and the enforcement of copyright compliance [9]. Further-more, related research has extended its scope to address training data contamination, encompassing issues such as noisy data [65], mislabeled content [60], and backdoor at-tacks [23, 31, 54, 61, 80]. 

## 6.5 Model Editing 

Model editing aims to modify the knowledge of pre-trained LLMs by redirecting specific inputs to targeted outputs [69, 75], and the “Locate-and-Edit” has emerged as a mainstream paradigm [69]. The representative method, ROME [40], locates FFNs as knowledge storage and applies a rank-1 update to modify knowledge. Subsequent works include MEMIT [41], PMET [33], EMMET [19], and AlphaEdit [15]. Despite sharing the same technical intuition of localized pa-rameter updates, our method is distinct from model editing. Model editing essentially redirects knowledge mappings to the given outputs, while LLM unlearning focuses on removing such mappings. This lack of substitute targets makes LLM unlearning confronted with severe utility degradation, and hinders the direct migration of editing algorithms. Besides, model editing typically targets atomic factual triples (Sub-ject, Relation, Object) with relative locality. LLM unlearning, however, addresses broader concepts or data traces that lead to significant knowledge entanglement. 

## 7 Conclusion 

In this paper, we focus on the LLMs’ property of knowl-edge storage for effective unlearning. We propose KUDA, a representation-based method that enables targeted parameter updates for knowledge removal with minimal degradation on model utility. KUDA utilizes a component-level identification method with a sliding window strategy to select unlearning layers, introduces a representation deviation mechanism to remove target knowledge, and employs the relaxation null-space projection to preserve the representations of retaining knowledge. Besides, we propose a two-stage tuning strat-egy to decouple the complex joint hyperparameter searches. Experimental results demonstrate that KUDA outperforms most representative baselines in balancing both knowledge removal and utility retention, and we further reveal the under-lying mechanism. 15 References 

[1] Maksym Andriushchenko, Francesco Croce, and Nico-las Flammarion. Jailbreaking Leading Safety-Aligned LLMs with Simple Adaptive Attacks. In ICLR , 2025. [2] Lucas Bourtoule, Varun Chandrasekaran, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Hengrui Jia, Adelin Travers, Baiwu Zhang, David Lie, and Nicolas Papernot. Machine Un-learning. In S&P , pages 141–159, 2021. [3] Huiqiang Chen, Tianqing Zhu, Xin Yu, and Wanlei Zhou. Machine unlearning via null space calibration. In IJCAI ,pages 358–366, 2024. [4] Min Chen, Zhikun Zhang, Tianhao Wang, Michael Backes, Mathias Humbert, and Yang Zhang. When ma-chine unlearning jeopardizes privacy. In CCS , pages 896–911, 2021. [5] Min Chen, Zhikun Zhang, Tianhao Wang, Michael Backes, Mathias Humbert, and Yang Zhang. Graph unlearning. In CCS , pages 499–513, 2022. [6] Min Chen, Zhikun Zhang, Tianhao Wang, Michael Backes, and Yang Zhang. FACE-AUDITOR: Data Au-diting in Facial Recognition Systems. In USENIX Secu-rity , 2023. [7] Zhaoyang Chu, Yao Wan, Zhikun Zhang, Di Wang, Zhou Yang, Hongyu Zhang, Pan Zhang, Xuanhua Shi, Hai Jin, and David Lo. Scrub It Out! Erasing Sensitive Memorization in Code Language Models via Machine Unlearning. In ICSE , 2026. [8] Cortes, Corinna and Mohri, Mehryar and Rostamizadeh, Afshin. L2 Regularization for Learning Kernels. In UAI ,page 109–116, 2009. [9] Guangyao Dou, Zheyuan Liu, Qing Lyu, Kaize Ding, and Eric Wong. Avoiding Copyright Infringement via Large Language Model Unlearning. In NAACL , pages 5176–5200, 2025. [10] Linkang Du, Xuanru Zhou, Min Chen, Chusong Zhang, Zhou Su, Peng Cheng, Jiming Chen, and Zhikun Zhang. Sok: Dataset Copyright Auditing in Machine Learning Systems. In S&P , pages 1–19, 2025. [11] Yanai Elazar, Shauli Ravfogel, Alon Jacovi, and Yoav Goldberg. Amnesic Probing: Behavioral Explanation with Amnesic Counterfactuals. Transactions of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics , pages 160–175, 2021. [12] Ronen Eldan and Mark Russinovich. Who’s Harry Pot-ter? Approximate Unlearning in LLMs. arXiv preprint ,2023. [13] Chongyu Fan, Jinghan Jia, Yihua Zhang, Anil Ramakr-ishna, Mingyi Hong, and Sijia Liu. Towards LLM Un-learning Resilient to Relearning Attacks: A Sharpness-Aware Minimization Perspective and Beyond. In ICML ,2025. [14] Chongyu Fan, Jiancheng Liu, Licong Lin, Jinghan Jia, Ruiqi Zhang, Song Mei, and Sijia Liu. Simplicity Pre-vails: Rethinking Negative Preference Optimization for LLM Unlearning. In NeurIPS Safe Generative AI Work-shop , 2024. [15] Junfeng Fang, Houcheng Jiang, Kun Wang, Yunshan Ma, Jie Shi, Xiang Wang, Xiangnan He, and Tat-Seng Chua. AlphaEdit: Null-Space Constrained Knowledge Editing for Language Models. In ICLR , 2025. [16] Javier Ferrando, Gerard I Gállego, Ioannis Tsiamas, and Marta R Costa-jussà. Explaining How Transformers Use Context to Build Predictions. In ACL , pages 5486–5513, 2023. [17] Mor Geva, Jasmijn Bastings, Katja Filippova, and Amir Globerson. Dissecting Recall of Factual Associations in Auto-Regressive Language Models. In EMNLP , pages 12216–12235, 2023. [18] Mor Geva, Roei Schuster, Jonathan Berant, and Omer Levy. Transformer feed-forward layers are key-value memories. In EMNLP , pages 5484–5495, 2021. [19] Akshat Gupta, Dev Sajnani, and Gopala Anumanchipalli. A Unified Framework for Model Editing. In Findings of EMNLP , pages 15403–15418, 2024. [20] Michael Hanna, Ollie Liu, and Alexandre Variengien. How Does GPT-2 Compute Greater-Than?: Interpreting Mathematical Abilities in a Pre-trained Language Model. In NeurIPS , pages 76033–76060, 2023. [21] Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring Massive Multitask Language Understand-ing. In ICLR , 2021. [22] Yihuai Hong, Yuelin Zou, Lijie Hu, Ziqian Zeng, Di Wang, and Haiqin Yang. Dissecting Fine-Tuning Unlearning in Large Language Models. In EMNLP ,pages 3933–3941, 2024. [23] Man Hu, Yahui Ding, Yatao Yang, Liangyu Chen, Yan-hao Jia, and Shuai Zhao. DUP: Detection-guided Un-learning for Backdoor Purification in Language Models. 

arXiv preprint , 2025. [24] Shengyuan Hu, Yiwei Fu, Steven Wu, and Virginia Smith. Jogging the Memory of Unlearned Models through Targeted Relearning Attacks. In ICML Work-shop on Foundation Models in the Wild , 2024. 16 [25] Yue Huang, Lichao Sun, Haoran Wang, Siyuan Wu, Qi-hui Zhang, Yuan Li, Chujie Gao, Yixin Huang, Wenhan Lyu, Yixuan Zhang, et al. Position: TrustLLM: Trust-worthiness in Large Language Models. In ICML , 2024. [26] Dang Huu-Tien, Hoang Thanh-Tung, Anh Bui, Le-Minh Nguyen, and Naoya Inoue. Improving LLM Unlearning Robustness via Random Perturbations. arXiv preprint ,2025. [27] Joel Jang, Dongkeun Yoon, Sohee Yang, Sungmin Cha, Moontae Lee, Lajanugen Logeswaran, and Minjoon Seo. Knowledge Unlearning for Mitigating Privacy Risks in Language Models. In ACL , pages 14389–14408. [28] Ganesh Jawahar, Benoît Sagot, and Djamé Seddah. What does BERT Learn about the Structure of Lan-guage? In ACL , pages 3651–3657, 2019. [29] Jiabao Ji, Yujian Liu, Yang Zhang, Gaowen Liu, Ra-mana Rao Kompella, Sijia Liu, and Shiyu Chang. Re-versing the Forget-Retain Objectives: An Efficient LLM Unlearning Framework from Logit Difference. In 

NeurIPS , pages 12581 – 12611, 2025. [30] Jinghan Jia, Jiancheng Liu, Yihua Zhang, Parikshit Ram, Nathalie Baracaldo, and Sijia Liu. WAGLE: Strategic Weight Attribution for Effective and Modular Unlearn-ing in Large Language Models. In NeurIPS , pages 55620 – 55646, 2024. [31] Peihai Jiang, Xixiang Lyu, Yige Li, and Jing Ma. Back-door Token Unlearning: Exposing and Defending Back-doors in Pretrained Language Models. In AAAI , pages 24285–24293, 2025. [32] Nathaniel Li, Alexander Pan, Anjali Gopal, Summer Yue, Daniel Berrios, Alice Gatti, Justin D Li, Ann-Kathrin Dombrowski, Shashwat Goel, Long Phan, et al. The WMDP Benchmark: Measuring and Reducing Ma-licious Use with Unlearning. In ICML , 2024. [33] Xiaopeng Li, Shasha Li, Shezheng Song, Jing Yang, Jun Ma, and Jie Yu. Pmet: Precise model editing in a transformer. In AAAI , pages 18564–18572, 2024. [34] Yinheng Li, Shaofei Wang, Han Ding, and Hang Chen. Large Language Models in Finance: A Survey. In ICAIF ,pages 374–382, 2023. [35] Chris Yuhao Liu, Yaxuan Wang, Jeffrey Flanigan, and Yang Liu. Large Language Model Unlearning via Embedding-Corrupted Prompts. In NeurIPS , pages 118198 – 118266, 2024. [36] Sijia Liu, Yuanshun Yao, Jinghan Jia, Stephen Casper, Nathalie Baracaldo, Peter Hase, Yuguang Yao, Chris Yuhao Liu, Xiaojun Xu, Hang Li, et al. Rethinking Machine Unlearning for Large Language Models. Nature Machine Intelligence , pages 1–14, 2025. [37] Weikai Lu, Ziqian Zeng, Jianwei Wang, Zhengdong Lu, Zelin Chen, Huiping Zhuang, and Cen Chen. Eraser: Jailbreaking Defense in Large Language Models via Unlearning Harmful Knowledge. arXiv preprint , 2024. [38] Ziming Luo, Zonglin Yang, Zexin Xu, Wei Yang, and Xinya Du. LLM4SR: A Survey on Large Language Models for Scientific Research. arXiv preprint , 2025. [39] Pratyush Maini, Zhili Feng, Avi Schwarzschild, Zachary Chase Lipton, and J Zico Kolter. TOFU: A Task of Fictitious Unlearning for LLMs. In COLM ,2024. [40] Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and Editing Factual Associations in GPT. In NeurIPS , pages 17359–17372, 2022. [41] Kevin Meng, Arnab Sen Sharma, Alex J Andonian, Yonatan Belinkov, and David Bau. Mass-Editing Mem-ory in a Transformer. In ICLR , 2023. [42] Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and Richard Socher. Pointer Sentinel Mixture Models. arXiv preprint , 2016. [43] Maximilian Mozes, Xuanli He, Bennett Kleinberg, and Lewis D. Griffin. Use of LLMs for Illicit Purposes: Threats, Prevention Measures, and Vulnerabilities. arXiv preprint , 2023. [44] Milad Nasr, Javier Rando, Nicholas Carlini, Jonathan Hayase, Matthew Jagielski, A. Feder Cooper, Daphne Ippolito, Christopher Choquette-Choo, Florian Tramer, and Katherine Lee. Scalable Extraction of Training Data from Aligned, Production Language Models. In ICLR ,2025. [45] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training Language Models to Follow Instructions with Human Feedback. In NeurIPS , pages 27730–27744, 2022. [46] Nicholas Pochinkov and Nandi Schoots. Dissecting Language Models: Machine Unlearning via Selective Pruning. arXiv preprint , 2024. [47] Xiangyu Qi, Ashwinee Panda, Kaifeng Lyu, Xiao Ma, Subhrajit Roy, Ahmad Beirami, Prateek Mittal, and Peter Henderson. Safety Alignment Should be Made More Than Just a Few Tokens Deep. In ICLR , 2025. 17 [48] Xiangyu Qi, Yi Zeng, Tinghao Xie, Pin-Yu Chen, Ruoxi Jia, Prateek Mittal, and Peter Henderson. Fine-tuning Aligned Language Models Compromises Safety, Even When Users Do Not Intend To! In ICLR , 2024. [49] Ruichen Qiu, Jiajun Tan, Jiayue Pu, Honglin Wang, Xiao-Shan Gao, and Fei Sun. A Survey on Unlearn-ing in Large Language Models. arXiv preprint , 2025. [50] Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christo-pher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. Di-rect Preference Optimization: Your Language Model is Secretly a Reward Model. In NeurIPS , pages 53728– 53741, 2023. [51] Prajit Ramachandran, Barret Zoph, and Quoc V. Le. Searching for Activation Functions. In ICLR Workshop ,2018. [52] Jie Ren, Yue Xing, Yingqian Cui, Charu C. Aggarwal, and Hui Liu. SoK: Machine Unlearning for Large Lan-guage Models. arXiv preprint , 2025. [53] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal Policy Optimiza-tion Algorithms. arXiv preprint , 2017. [54] Bingqi Shang, Yiwei Chen, Yihua Zhang, Bingquan Shen, and Sijia Liu. Forgetting to Forget: Attention Sink as A Gateway for Backdooring LLM Unlearning. 

arXiv preprint , 2025. [55] William F Shen, Xinchi Qiu, Meghdad Kurmanji, Alex Iacob, Lorenzo Sani, Yihong Chen, Nicola Cancedda, and Nicholas D Lane. LUNAR: LLM Unlearning via Neural Activation Redirection. arXiv preprint , 2025. [56] Dan Shi, Tianhao Shen, Yufei Huang, Zhigen Li, Yongqi Leng, Renren Jin, Chuang Liu, Xinwei Wu, Zishan Guo, Linhao Yu, et al. Large Language Model Safety: A Holistic Survey. arXiv preprint , 2024. [57] Weijia Shi, Anirudh Ajith, Mengzhou Xia, Yangsibo Huang, Daogao Liu, Terra Blevins, Danqi Chen, and Luke Zettlemoyer. DETECTING PRETRAINING DATA FROM LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS. In 

ICLR , 2024. [58] Weijia Shi, Jaechan Lee, Yangsibo Huang, Sadhika Malladi, Jieyu Zhao, Ari Holtzman, Daogao Liu, Luke Zettlemoyer, Noah A Smith, and Chiyuan Zhang. Muse: Machine Unlearning Six-Way Evaluation for Language Models. In ICLR , 2025. [59] Weijia Shi, Sewon Min, Maria Lomeli, Chunting Zhou, Margaret Li, Gergely Szilvasy, Rich James, Xi Victo-ria Lin, Noah A Smith, Luke Zettlemoyer, et al. In-context pretraining: Language modeling beyond docu-ment boundaries. In ICLR , 2024. [60] Igor Shilov, Alex Cloud, Aryo Pradipta Gema, Jacob Goldman-Wetzler, Nina Panickssery, Henry Sleight, Erik Jones, and Cem Anil. Beyond Data Filtering: Knowledge Localization for Capability Removal in LLMs. arXiv preprint , 2025. [61] Yanghao Su, Jie Zhang, Yiming Li, Tianwei Zhang, Qing Guo, Weiming Zhang, Nenghai Yu, Nils Lukas, and Wenbo Zhou. BURN: Backdoor Unlearning via Ad-versarial Boundary Analysis. arXiv preprint , 2025. [62] Tian Dong, Yan Meng, Shaofeng Li, Guoxing Chen, Zhen Liu, Haojin Zhu. Depth gives a false sense of pri-vacy: Llm internal states inversion. In USENIX Security ,pages 1629–1648, 2025. [63] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat Mod-els. arXiv preprint , 2023. [64] Changsheng Wang, Yihua Zhang, Jinghan Jia, Parik-shit Ram, Dennis Wei, Yuguang Yao, Soumyadeep Pal, Nathalie Baracaldo Angel, and Sijia Liu. Invariance Makes LLM Unlearning Resilient Even to Unantici-pated Downstream Fine-Tuning. In ICLR , 2025. [65] Changsheng Wang, Yihua Zhang, Dennis Wei, Jinghan Jia, Pin-Yu Chen, and Sijia Liu. LLM Unlearning on Noisy Forget Sets: A Study of Incomplete, Rewritten, and Watermarked Data. In AISec , pages 136–145, 2025. [66] Qizhou Wang, Jin Peng Zhou, Zhanke Zhou, Saebyeol Shin, Bo Han, and Kilian Q Weinberger. Rethinking LLM Unlearning Objectives: A Gradient Perspective and Go Beyond. In ICLR , 2025. [67] Shen Wang, Tianlong Xu, Hang Li, Chaoli Zhang, Joleen Liang, Jiliang Tang, Philip S. Yu, and Qingsong Wen. Large Language Models for Education: A Survey and Outlook. arXiv preprint , 2024. [68] Shipeng Wang, Xiaorong Li, Jian Sun, and Zongben Xu. Training Networks in Null Space of Feature Covariance for Continual Learning. In ICCV , pages 184–193, 2021. [69] Song Wang, Yaochen Zhu, Haochen Liu, Zaiyi Zheng, Chen Chen, and Jundong Li. Knowledge Editing for Large Language Models: A Survey. ACM Computing Surveys , 57, 2024. [70] Yue Wang, Qizhou Wang, Feng Liu, Wei Huang, Yali Du, Xiaojiang Du, and Bo Han. GRU: Mitigating the Trade-off between Unlearning and Retention for Large Language Models. arXiv preprint , 2025. 18 [71] Zhichao Wang, Bin Bi, Shiva Kumar Pentyala, Ki-ran Ramnath, Sougata Chaudhuri, Shubham Mehrotra, Xiang-Bo Mao, Sitaram Asur, et al. A Comprehensive Survey of LLM Alignment Techniques: RLHF, RLAIF, PPO, DPO and More. arXiv preprint , 2024. [72] Xinwei Wu, Junzhuo Li, Minghui Xu, Weilong Dong, Shuangzhi Wu, Chao Bian, and Deyi Xiong. Depn: Detecting and editing privacy neurons in pretrained lan-guage models. In EMNLP , pages 2875–2886, 2023. [73] Nakyeong Yang, Minsung Kim, Seunghyun Yoon, Joongbo Shin, and Kyomin Jung. FaithUn: Toward Faithful Forgetting in Language Models by Investigat-ing the Interconnectedness of Knowledge. In EMNLP ,pages 12999 – 13014, 2025. [74] Yuanshun Yao, Xiaojun Xu, and Yang Liu. Large Lan-guage Model Unlearning. In NeurIPS , pages 105425– 105475, 2024. [75] Yunzhi Yao, Peng Wang, Bozhong Tian, Siyuan Cheng, Zhoubo Li, Shumin Deng, Huajun Chen, and Ningyu Zhang. Editing Large Language Models: Problems, Methods, and Opportunities. In EMNLP , pages 10222– 10240, 2023. [76] Jifan Yu, Xiaozhi Wang, Shangqing Tu, Shulin Cao, Daniel Zhang-Li, Xin Lv, Hao Peng, Zijun Yao, Xiaohan Zhang, Hanming Li, et al. KoLA: Carefully Benchmark-ing World Knowledge of Large Language Models. In 

ICLR , 2024. [77] Qingjie Zhang, Haoting Qian, Zhicong Huang, Cheng Hong, Minlie Huang, Ke Xu, Chao Zhang, and Han Qiu. Understanding the Dilemma of Unlearning for Large Language Models. arXiv preprint , 2025. [78] Ruiqi Zhang, Licong Lin, Yu Bai, and Song Mei. Neg-ative Preference Optimization: From Catastrophic Col-lapse to Effective Unlearning. In COLM , 2024. [79] Xianren Zhang, Hui Liu, Delvin Ce Zhang, Xianfeng Tang, Qi He, Dongwon Lee, and Suhang Wang. Does Multimodal Large Language Model Truly Unlearn? Stealthy MLLM Unlearning Attack. arXiv preprint ,2025. [80] Shuai Zhao, Xiaobao Wu, Cong-Duy T Nguyen, Yan-hao Jia, Meihuizi Jia, Feng Yichao, and Anh Tuan Luu. Unlearning Backdoor Attacks for LLMs with Weak-to-Strong Knowledge Distillation. In ACL Findings , pages 4937–4952, 2025. 

## A Safety Alignment 

Due to the large-scale training corpora and powerful memo-rization abilities, LLMs can easily learn undesirable behaviors during pre-training [36]. Therefore, alignment techniques are widely adopted to ensure that LLMs’ behaviors are consistent with human values [71]. The general idea is to adjust the gen-eration to prioritize safe, truthful, and beneficial outputs. As a representative, RLFH [45] views alignment as reinforcement learning. 

## A.1 RLHF 

Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) [45] is the most widely adopted approach for LLM alignment, which uses the feedback from humans to guide LLMs’ generation to align with human preferences. RLHF typically involves three stages: • i. Supervised fine-tuning (SFT). A pre-trained model is fine-tuned on high-quality human demonstrations by maxi-mum likelihood estimation, yielding model πSFT .• ii. Reward model training. Use the feedback to train a reward model Rφ that predicts human preferences. • iii. Reinforcement learning optimization. Optimize pre-trained model πθ via reinforcement learning, typically through Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [53]. The objective of RLHF is to get close to the human prefer-ence while retaining the original behaviors: max  

> θ

Ex∼πθ

Rφ(x) − β · KL (πθ || πSFT ) ,

where x denotes generation responses, the KL ensures that the aligned model πθ does not deviate too far from the SFT model, and β controls the divergence penalty. 

## A.2 Limitation of Alignment 

The safety capabilities of LLMs primarily rely on alignment techniques, such as Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) and Supervised Fine-tuning (SFT). How-ever, recent studies have cast doubt on the robustness of these defenses. Qi et al. [47] revealed the phenomenon of shallow alignment , demonstrating that the effects of alignment train-ing are often superficial and fail to fundamentally reshape the model’s underlying knowledge distribution. Specifically, the safety mechanisms of aligned models are frequently confined to the initial tokens of the output, functioning as standardized safety prefixes ( e.g. , “Sorry, I cannot answer this question”). Nevertheless, this mechanism is inherently vulnerable. As demonstrated by Andriushchenko et al. [1], prefilling attacks can easily bypass these defenses by manually forc-ing the model to start with an affirmative response, thereby 19 re-activating the dormant harmful knowledge in the model’s parameters. Furthermore, Qi et al. [48] found that even be-nign fine-tuning on downstream tasks can cause the safety mechanism to be out of action, thus leading to the leakage of sensitive information or the generation of harmful content. These vulnerabilities suggest that merely teaching a model how to refuse is insufficient for high-stakes safety require-ments. There is a pressing need for more thorough approaches that move beyond behavioral constraints. LLM unlearning emerges as a promising solution in this context. Unlike tra-ditional safety alignment, LLM unlearning aims to funda-mentally erase specific harmful knowledge encoded in the models’ parameters. Therefore, it theoretically offers a more robust path toward intrinsic safety, ensuring that models re-main secure even under adversarial fine-tuning or sophisti-cated inference-time attacks. 

## B Experimental Details B.1 Evaluation Metrics 

MUSE [58]. It mainly leverages the text-generation capacity of LLM and designs three complementary metrics to holisti-cally quantify the unlearning performance. • Verbatim Memorization (VerbMem) This metric quanti-fies the verbatim reproduction of contexts from data in the forgetting set. We evaluate this by inputting the LLM with the initial tokens x<t of a text sequence x ∈ Df , and com-paring the similarity between the generated continuation and the ground-truth one x[t:end ]:VerbMem (M , Df ) = 1

n ∑ 

> x∈Df

ROUGE (M (x<t ), x[t:end ]),

where n is the sample size of Df , ROUGE denotes the ROUGE-L F1 score. • Knowledge Memorization (KnowMem) This metric eval-uates the model’s ability to utilize target knowledge across various generation tasks through the format of knowledge-based question-answering. The target knowledge can orig-inate from either the forgetting set or the retaining set. Specifically, prompt the LLM with questions Q, and com-pare the similarity between its output and the ground-truth answer A:KnowMem (M , D) = 1

|D| ∑

> (Q,A)) ∈D

ROUGE (M (Q), A),

where D can be Df or Dr. Notably, (Q, A) pairs are specif-ically designed based on text excerpts of D, thereby reflect-ing the LLM’s accurate comprehension of the questions and its ability to appropriately utilize knowledge. • Privacy Leakage (PrivLeak) This metric quantifies the privacy leakage degree of the unlearned model by measur-ing its defense to Membership Inference Attacks (MIA), a common privacy attack. It assesses whether the model inadvertently reveals the membership that x ∈ Df was used for training. Specifically, apply a Min-K% Prob [57] MIA method to the model and compute the corresponding AUC-ROC score of discriminating members datasets and non-members datasets. Based on this, PrivLeak is defined by comparing with the “retrain” model: PrivLeak = AUC (Mun ; Df , Dh) − AUC (Mre ; Df , Dh)

AUC (Mre ; Df , Dh) ,

where Dh is the hold-out (non-member) set which the model has never been trained on, Mun and Mre denote the un-learned model and the retrained model, respectively. • Knowledge Removal Degree (KRD) This metric provides a holistic evaluation of forgetting quality: when any for-getting metric reflects poor performance of knowledge re-moval, KRD approaches 0; 1 indicates complete forgetting. The harmonic mean achieves this effectively by averaging the reciprocals. Moreover, the disruption caused by over-forgetting should be eliminated in the computation process. For instance, when a metric yields a value better than that of the “retrain” model, its forgetting quality should be con-sidered equivalent to that of the “retrain” model, rather than superior. For MUSE, we truncate the metric values using those of the ”retrain” model. Formally, KRD is defined as: ˜FQ 1 

> M

= VM (Mo) − max {VM (Mf ), VM (Mr)}

VM (Mo) − VM (Mr)

˜FQ 2 

> M

= KM (Mo) − max {KM (Mf ), KM (Mr)}

KM (Mo) − KM (Mr)

˜FQ 3 

> M

= PL (Mo) − max {PL (Mf ), PL (Mr)}

PL (Mo) − PL (Mr)

KRD MUSE = 3

∑3 

> i=11˜FQ iM

,

where VM , KM and PL represent VerbMem, KnowMem on Df , and PrivLeak, respectively. Similarly, Mo, Mr and 

Mf are “origin”, “retrain” and unlearned models. 

WMDP [32]. It assesses the LLM’s comprehension of specific knowledge through a multiple-choice format. • Answer Accuracy (Acc) WMDP evaluates the model’s comprehension of hazardous knowledge by measuring its accuracy in answering multiple-choice questions. It com-prises a large-scale collection of questions across different domains of harmful information. During evaluation, the model is prompted with a question and four candidate op-tions. The overall accuracy is then computed based on the 20 model’s responses: Acc = ∑ 1(M (Q) = A)

Ntotal 

,

where 1 is the indicator function, and Ntotal is the number of correctly answered questions and total questions. • Knowledge Removal Degree (KRD) The KRD is consis-tent with that of MUSE. However, due to the absence of the “retrain” model (the reason is detailed Section 5.1), we trun-cate the metric values to 25, which is the desired test score for forgetting, indicating that the model answers randomly. Therefore, KRD for WMDP is formulated as: ˜FQ 1 

> W

= Cyber (Mo) − max {Cyber (Mf ), 25 }

Cyber (Mo) − 25 ˜FQ 2 

> W

= Bio (Mo) − max {Bio (Mf ), 25 }

Bio (Mo) − 25 KRD WMDP = 2

∑2 

> i=11˜FQ iW

,

where Cyber and Bio represent answer accuracy in test sets related to Cyber and Bio, respectively. Besides, Mo and Mf

denote “origin” and unlearned models. • MMLU Scores (MMLU [21]) WMDP adopts MMLU to evaluate a LLM’s general knowledge that should be retained after unlearning. MMLU benchmark provides a compre-hensive evaluation of a LLM’s knowledge. It comprises 57 subjects spanning a wide range of fields, covering basic mathematics, U.S. history, computer science, etc. With a difficulty spectrum from elementary to advanced, MMLU is suitable for testing models at different levels of proficiency. Similarly, MMLU employs a multiple-choice format con-sistent with the WMDP test sets, and its scoring metric is based on the overall proportion of questions the model answers correctly across all subjects. 

## B.2 Baseline Implementation 

MUSE. Both GA and NPO are implemented with GradDiff and employ the optimal retaining loss following Shi et al. [58] (KL divergence for BOOKS, and Cross-Entropy for NEWS). Likewise, SimNPO is paired with the corresponding retaining loss according to Fan et al. [14]. The implementation of WHP directly uses the code provided by Shi et al. [58]. For RMU on MUSE, due to the absence of an open-source implementation, we adopt the MUSE codebase to reproduce RMU. 

WMDP. We implemented GA, NPO, and SimNPO following the settings of Fan et al. [14]. For all baselines, we adopt the hyperparameter configura-tions reported in the benchmarks or their respective papers to get the optimal performance. Regarding the implementation of RMU in the MUSE benchmark, we perform a grid search to identify the optimal hyperparameter configuration. Table 6: The detailed hyperparameter configuration of KUDA for implementation across different datasets and models. Within the ’Epoch’ column, the notation i − j means that the model is trained with a total of i epochs, with the j-th checkpoint selected as the optimal performance for our evalu-ation. Others default to the final model.                                           

> Dataset Model βτLearning Rate Epoch WMDP
> Zephry-7B-Beta 2 .0 2 ×10 −31×10 −51Llama-3.1-8B 0.1 3 ×10 −31×10 −51Qwen3-8B 1.0 4 ×10 −31×10 −41
> MUSE-BOOKS ICLM-7B 0.1 8 ×10 −21×10 −55
> MUSE-NEWS Llama-2-7B 2.0 4 ×10 −35×10 −53−2

## B.3 KUDA Implementation 

All experiments are conducted on a server equipped with two NVIDIA L40 (48GB) GPUs and 512GB of system RAM. During the training phase, we employ a batch size of 4. Due to the memory requirement of null-space projection matrices and the constraints of limited GPUs’ memory, we implement a layer-wise update mechanism that necessitates frequent ma-trix transfers between CPU and GPU memory. Although this enables execution under hardware constraints, the resulting I/O overhead introduces an extra performance delay. Conse-quently, the operational efficiency of KUDA is scalable, sug-gesting that the execution speed could be further optimized in environments with sufficient GPU memory to accommodate all matrices locally. In Section 5.2, β is searched over the range of 0.1 ∼ 2.0 ,while τ is searched within the range of 1 × 10 −3 ∼ 1 × 10 −5.The selection process adheres to our proposed two-stage strat-egy to facilitate the efficient configuration. By transitioning from a purely empirical search to this structured pipeline, we significantly reduce the search space complexity while ensur-ing that the selected parameters achieve a balance between forgetting and retention. The detailed hyperparameter config-urations are presented in Table 6. Besides, we set N = 10 and 

s = 4 for layer selection. Due to the small scale of datasets used in Section 5.2, we set the sampling ratio p = 100. Notably, it is observed that identical hyperparameter con-figurations can lead to different unlearning outcomes across different hardware environments, such as GPU architectures. However, the fundamental trends of hyperparameter sensitiv-ity remain consistent with our analysis in Section 5.4. This suggests that suitable hyperparameters across different hard-ware devices can be efficiently identified using the two-stage tuning strategy. 21 C Detailed Analysis C.1 Unlearning Layers Analysis 

Setup. We evaluate unlearning performance across various unlearning layers to investigate how the selection of target layers influences the overall results. Figure 6 presents the unlearning performance with different unlearning layers, and Figure 7 presents the CE FFN and CE Attn scores. 

Advantage of FFN Dominance. Figure 6 demonstrates that unlearning performance is highly sensitive to the functional properties of the targeted layers. Unlearning layers with high CE FFN , as identified in Figure 7, significantly outperform lay-ers with high CE Attn in balancing forgetting and utility. This indicates that unlearning on layers responsible for knowledge storage enables precise removal of target knowledge. 

Comparison with Naive Selection. Figure 6 also reveals the limitations of a naive strategy that directly selects layers with the highest CE FFN scores. In our experiments, these peak values coincidentally occur in the shallow layers ( l3 ∼ l6), as presented in Figure 7. However, updating these layers yields poor unlearning performance, failing to remove knowledge while severely compromising the model utility. This may stem from that the first several layers handle generic, low-level features shared across tasks [28]. Updating these lacks the semantic specificity required for targeted knowledge removal, thus rendering them unsuitable as unlearning layers. 

The Limits of Depth. We have discussed the limitations of shallow layers with high CE FFN scores. However, deeper layers do not indicate better unlearning performance. While deeper layers theoretically aggregate more knowledge due to residual connections, our findings reveal a critical bound-ary. There exist the transition layers ( l10 ∼ l15 ) between the FFN-dominant and the MHSA-dominant zone. These layers might also exhibit high CE FFN , especially those located at the terminus of the FFN-dominant zone, for example, l10 ∼ l12 .However, updating these layers could cause severe utility degradation. This potentially arises from the disruption of the functional transition between knowledge storage and seman-tics aggregation. 

Consecutive Layers. The right plot of Figure 6 also reveals a slight advantage of consecutive layers. While some discontin-uous selections may achieve slightly higher forgetting, they often suffer from a decline in model utility. A selection of con-tinuous layers ensures a unified modification of the targeted knowledge representation, whereas skipping intermediate lay-ers may disrupt the structural coherence of the representation space, leading to functional instability. Therefore, consecu-tive unlearning layers could simplify the complexity of the situation where layers with high CE FFN are discrete. 

Figure 9: Unlearning with fixed β = 0.1 and different τ. The left plot employs Zephyr-7B-Beta, while the right plot corre-sponds to Qwen-3. The highlighted value of τ is the stability boundary. The left y-axis represents KRD, while the right y-axis denotes the MMLU score. A reference line at KRD = 0.9is plotted. The “stability boundary” is defined as the specific 

τ where KRD begins to falls lower than reference. 

## C.2 Stability Boundary 

Setup. We conduct an initial sensitivity analysis on the hy-perparameter τ. In this setup, we fix β = 0.1, representing the most aggressive forgetting in our experiments. Under this fixed constraint, we progressively decrease the value of τ. Par-ticularly, we define the “stability boundary” as the specific value of τ at which KRD first falls below 0.9. 

Observation. Figure 9 illustrates the impact of different val-ues of τ on unlearning performance with a fixed β = 0.1. We observe a significant transition in forgetting at a specific τ,which we identify as the stability boundary . At or below this point, KUDA fails to remove the target knowledge thoroughly. This phenomenon arises from the entanglement of knowledge representations, which causes the relaxation null-space pro-jection to exert a global preservation effect across multiple domains. Beyond merely preserving the retaining knowledge, it excessively constrains perturbations across the entire repre-sentation space. Consequently, the deviations introduced for knowledge removal are also eliminated. In practice, we adopt a value of τ slightly larger than the stability boundary, such as 2 × 10 −3 for Zephyr-7B-Beta and 4 × 10 −3 for Qwen-3, and then gradually increase β across {0.1, 1.0, 2.0} to achieve the unlearning balance. 

## C.3 Causal Effect Analysis 

Setup. We execute causal tracing on Zephyr-7B-Beta and calculate the causal effect of FFNs and MHSAs, to interpret how the choice of unlearning layers influences overall per-formance. We highlight the top-5 layers with the strongest CE in FFN and MHSA using red lines, and mark our selected unlearning layers with black borders. By identifying layers with strong causal effects on knowledge storage, causal trac-ing provides a principled and effective method of guiding layer selection, significantly reducing search space without sacrificing effectiveness. 

Observation. Our component-level identification method con-sists of causal tracing and causal effect. Figure 10 presents 22 (a) Causal effect on FFN (b) Causal effect on MHSA 

Figure 10: Visualization of causal effect on Zephyr-7B-Beta. The darker colors indicate a stronger causal effect. Addition-ally, we mark the five consecutive layers with the strongest causal effects using red dashed lines. Specifically, the identi-fied unlearning layers are demarcated with black borders to illustrate the scope of our parameter modifications. the results of our method conducted separately for the com-ponents of FFN and MHSA on the model Zephyr-7B-Beta. It indicates that the layers exhibiting the strongest causal effects in the FFN and MHSA are disjoint. This suggests a functional decoupling between knowledge storage and semantics ag-gregation, which depend on FFNs and MHSAs, respectively. Therefore, when unlearning updates are confined to FFN-dominant layers that are most involved in knowledge stor-age and association, the impact on MHSA-dominant capabili-ties ( e.g. , summarization and reasoning) can be significantly minimized. Figure 12 demonstrates that KUDA successfully achieves removing target knowledge without compromising the model’s excellent text generation capabilities. This bal-ance is attributed to the layer selection strategy viewed from the perspective of knowledge storage. It confines the impact of parameter updates to representations associated with the targeted knowledge encoded in models, thereby remaining higher-level language modeling capacities intact. Besides, building upon CE FFN scores, we determine the unlearning layers using a sliding window strategy integrated with a hit ratio constraint. Figure 10 illustrates that selected unlearning layers fall within layers primarily FFN dominant, which stems from the inclusion of the hit ratio constraint. This ensures that the selected layers are responsible for knowl-edge storage, which effectively directs the parameter updates toward targeted knowledge removal. By concentrating the unlearning process within these specific functional modules, our method minimizes unnecessary perturbations to unrelated architectural components. 

## D Visualization Illustration D.1 Visualization of Representation Space 

We present more t-SNE visualization results between Wiki-text and different retaining datasets in Figure 11. For MUSE-NEWS, it can be observed that the distribution pattern of representations is similar to Figure 3, with significant regions of overlap. For the Cyber and Bio Retain Corpora, their rep-resentations exhibit reduced overlap with Wikitext. However, although they are more distinguishable from Wikitext in the 

(a) t-SNE Visualization of representations using Wikitext and MUSE-NEWS 

(b) t-SNE Visualization of representations using Wikitext, Cyber-Retain-Corpus and Bio-Retain-Corpus 

Figure 11: t-SNE Analysis. We present the t-SNE results be-tween different datasets and Wikitext to illustrate the overlap of representations. Question: Who was eager to help and exclaimed that he would be honored to              

> assist Harry Potter?
> Origin: Dobby . Etymology :The house -elf's name is a pun on the English word
> "dubious", which means "questionable…
> Unlearned: 1. Dumbledore 2. Snape 3. Nymphadora Tonks .Description:
> Dumbledore was the only one who answered Harry's call for help immediately…
> GPT -4o :Dobby the house -elf was eager to help and exclaimed that he would be
> honored to assist Harry Potter…
> Example related to Forgetting Knowledge
> Question: Who did Hermione Granger marry?
> Origin: Ron Weasley . Hermione Granger (b. 1979) was an English Muggle -
> born…
> Unlearned: Ron Weasley . Hermione Granger (b. 1979) was an English Muggle -
> born…
> GPT -4o :Hermione Granger married Ron Weasley . They eventually have two
> children: Rose and Hugo.
> Example related to Retaining Knowledge

Figure 12: The response examples generated by different models with specific questions of MUSE-BOOKS. MUSE-BOOKS is completely relevant to the “Harry Potter” series books. The “Unlearned” model is applied with KUDA. Green answers indicate correctness, while Red answers indicate errors. shallow layer, the representation boundary between them be-comes less clear as layer depth increases. This similarity between representations, to some extent, reduces reliance on the knowledge distribution of Dr. Even when Dr covers a limited range of knowledge, KUDA can preserve not only the representations of the retaining knowl-edge but also multi-domain knowledge not included in Dr.23 D.2 Unlearned Examples of Responses 

To illustrate the superiority of KUDA intuitively, we visually show the model behaviors before and after unlearning on the question-answering task. 

Setup. We conduct experiments on the question sets from MUSE-BOOKS, which is designed based on text excerpts of the popular Harry Potter series. The cultural familiarity enables us to efficiently verify both factual accuracy and se-mantic coherence in the generated responses. We implement querying tests using question sets related to forgetting and retaining knowledge, and compare the model’s outputs before and after unlearning via KUDA. Additionally, we introduce ChatGPT-4o as a reference model to validate the correctness of answers. 

Obeservation. Figure 12 shows a visual demonstration of the unlearning effectiveness achieved by KUDA. The responses of the unlearned model deviate only on questions related to forgetting knowledge, while all other responses remain con-sistent with the original model and ChatGPT-4o. Besides, the deviating answers remain logically coherent, highly relevant to the questions, and factually plausible ( e.g. , Dumbledore and Snape indeed take great care of Harry Potter in books). These observations indicate that the unlearned model pre-cisely removes knowledge in the forgetting set. Furthermore, it generates contextually appropriate answers based on retain-ing knowledge and a proper comprehension of the questions. This suggests the retention of core language capabilities, in-cluding context awareness and text generation. We attribute this to our focus on the property of knowledge storage, which preserves the capability of language modeling by only updat-ing specific FFNs and avoiding modification to MHSA, as discussed in Section 2.1. As a result, the outputs remain se-mantically meaningful and controllable, rather than degrading into incoherence or randomness. 24