Title: Scientific Machine Learning for Engine Health Management and Remaining Useful Life Prediction

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.30593v1

Published Time: Mon, 01 Jun 2026 00:28:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 42

Markdown Content:
# Computational Science Laboratory Report CSL-TR-26-3 June 1, 2026 

# Jostein Barry-Straume, Changmin Son, Adrian Sandu, Gavan Burke, Rekha Sundararajan, Andrew Rimell, James G. Steinrock 

# “Scientific Machine Learning for Engine Health Management and Remaining Useful Life Prediction” 

## Computational Science Laboratory “Compute the Future!” Department of Computer Science Virginia Tech Blacksburg, VA 24060 Phone: (540) 231-2193 Fax: (540) 231-6075 Email: jostein@vt.edu 

## Web: https://csl.cs.vt.edu 

> .
> arXiv:2605.30593v1 [cs.LG] 28 May 2026

Abstract 

Engine Health Management (EHM) depends on reliable forecasting of Remaining Useful Life (RUL) and on tracking thermal indicators such as turbine gas temperature (TGT). In practice, real-world fleet data are heterogeneous and non-stationary, and point predictions alone are insuf-ficient for risk-aware maintenance decisions. This paper presents a multi-task scientific machine learning framework for turbine prognostics that jointly predicts turbine gas temperature untrimmed (TGTU), Delta Tur-bine Gas Temperature (DTGT), and RUL, with quantified uncertainty in the form of prediction intervals whose empirical coverage is evaluated. A shared sequence encoder (convolutional front-end with residual bidirec-tional LSTM layers and attention pooling) feeds task-specific heads, in-cluding mean–variance estimation for probabilistic regression and, option-ally, a survival head for threshold-based event modeling. The framework is designed to be tunable via a small set of practitioner-facing parameters (e.g., DTGT thresholding rules and RUL target construction) so that de-ployment can align with in-house policies and proprietary criteria. The predictive performance of the proposed framework is evaluated using both point and interval metrics, including mean absolute error (MAE), predic-tion interval coverage probability (PICP), mean prediction interval width (MPIW), and the coverage–width criterion (CWC). Results are reported both in aggregate and stratified by flight phase and maintenance segment to highlight operational-context effects and to support uncertainty-aware monitoring. 

# 1 Introduction 

Forecasting Remaining Useful Life (RUL) underpins maintenance strategies for turbofan gas engines. Accurate RUL forecasts have significant impacts in En-gine Health Management (EHM), including: (1) Safety , by reducing the risk of catastrophic engine failure, (2) Reliability , by avoiding unplanned engine downtime, (3) Cost-effectiveness , by optimizing maintenance resources, and 

(4) Lifespan extension , by supporting proper monitoring of engine health. Leveraging modern Scientific Machine Learning (SciML) approaches together with Uncertainty Quantification (UQ) provides a pathway to developing robust EHM frameworks. However, translating benchmark-level results into opera-tional settings is challenging for at least two reasons. First, many published prognostic methods are developed and validated on simulated run-to-failure benchmarks (e.g., C–MAPSS), whereas real fleet data are heterogeneous, cen-sored, and shaped by maintenance actions. Second, uncertainty estimates that appear adequate under i.i.d. assumptions can degrade under dataset shift, yet UQ is often omitted or not empirically validated in a way that supports risk-aware maintenance decisions. In practice, real-world datasets contain missing values, sensor drift, varying mission and ambient conditions, and policy-driven maintenance resets that trun-cate trajectories. These factors require extensive data wrangling and prepro-cessing, and they motivate models that (i) align target definitions with in-house 1policy (e.g., what constitutes an “event” for RUL) and (ii) report uncertainty in a verifiable way through calibrated prediction intervals and reliability metrics. This emphasis on real data is important because it exposes non-stationarity and operational regime shifts that are typically absent in synthetic benchmarks and that can strongly affect both accuracy and calibration. For this task, a deep learning (neural network) architecture for turbine prog-nostics is developed with the following core features: (1) Multi-objective learning . One unified network predicts turbine gas temperature untrimmed (TGTU), Delta Turbine Gas Temperature (DTGT), remaining useful life (RUL), and degradation/survival attributes from shared representations. (2) Remain-ing useful life . Multiple approaches to constructing and predicting RUL are supported within one system. (3) Uncertainty Quantification . Each tar-get prediction is accompanied by prediction intervals with empirically evalu-ated coverage and sharpness. (4) Tunable knobs . Parameterized variables in the framework enable in-house tuning to adjust for proprietary information (e.g., DTGT thresholding rules and RUL target construction) that is not read-ily shareable with developers. (5) Real-world evaluation . The methodology is trained and evaluated on real fleet data and is analyzed by flight phase and maintenance segment to highlight operational-context effects. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews back-ground information and common terminology used in EHM. Section 3 surveys approaches to predicting RUL with machine learning methods. Section 4 de-scribes the underlying methodologies that serve as the foundation of the present work. Section 5 introduces the novel multi-objective Engine Health Management neural network. Section 6 details the general experiment setup, data preprocess-ing, and neural network training. Section 7 presents the experimental results. Section 8 summarizes the contributions of the paper and discusses potential directions for future work. 

# 2 Engine Health Management and Uncertainty Quantification 

This work studies aero-engine degradation monitoring and prediction with a focus on thermal indicators and predictive uncertainty. In this section, the following background concepts pertinent to the presented methodology are re-viewed: Engine Health Management (EHM) in Section 2.1, Turbine Gas Tem-perature (TGT) in Section 2.2, Nominal Turbine Gas Temperature (NTGT) in Section 2.3, Delta Turbine Gas Temperature (DTGT) in Section 2.4, Remain-ing Useful Life (RUL) in Section 2.5, and Uncertainty Quantification (UQ) in Section 2.6. Turbine Gas Temperature (TGT) critically affects component degradation and is therefore useful for predicting Remaining Useful Life (RUL). During the engine life cycle, operating temperatures degrade engine components, forcing the engine to operate at higher temperatures to maintain efficiency. This is 2illustrated in Figure 1, where the Delta Turbine Gas Temperature (DTGT) rises over time, but then resets after scheduled maintenance. DTGT is the difference between the recorded TGT and the analytical temperature from a physics-based model. This relationship between TGT, DTGT, and engine degradation can be leveraged to help better model Remaining Useful Life (RUL) for Engine Health Management (EHM). 

Figure 1: Degrading engine components require hotter operation to maintain thrust output. This is shown by the rise of DTGT over time within each main-tenance segment. 

## 2.1 Engine Health Management (EHM) 

Engine Health Management (EHM), often framed within Prognostics and Health Management (PHM), integrates sensing, modeling, diagnostics, prognostics, and decision support to maintain safety and reduce life-cycle cost [1]. For gas turbines, EHM traditionally centers on gas-path measurements (temper-atures, pressures, spool speeds, fuel flow) and compares them against baseline expectations to infer health states of major modules (compressor, combustor, turbine) [2, 3]. Data-driven and model-based gas-path analysis are both used: the former leverages statistical/machine-learning surrogates; the latter adapts physics engine models and solves an inverse problem to estimate component health parameters [2–5]. Model-based health estimation methods frequently use optimal state-estimation and filtering techniques (e.g., Kalman-filter variants) to infer latent health pa-rameters from noisy sensor streams [6]. In EHM there are three main strategies: (1) Reactive maintenance, (2) Pre-ventive maintenance, and (3) Predictive maintenance [7–11]. Reactive mainte-nance is the approach of running an engine to failure, and then conducting main-tenance. Maintenance after failure is expensive and dangerous for the aerospace industry. Preventive maintenance is the approach of performing repair well be-fore failure. This strategy typically does not consider the actual condition of the engine but mitigates risk at the expense of higher costs. Predictive maintenance 3seeks to optimize the time to do maintenance. In other words, this approach is the “Goldilocks,” in the sense that it is neither too early nor too late. By factoring in the condition of the engine, unplanned downtime and operational costs are minimized while providing anomaly detection. 

## 2.2 Turbine Gas Temperature (TGT) 

Turbine Gas Temperature (TGT) (closely related to the commonly trended ex-haust gas temperature, EGT) is a primary thermal indicator of overall core loading and engine margin. Empirically, EGT/TGT correlates with operating condition (e.g., thrust, fuel flow, ambient temperature) and with gradual per-formance deterioration (e.g., compressor/turbine efficiency and flow capacity shifts) [3, 12]. Because raw temperature depends on flight and ambient condi-tions, effective monitoring requires normalizing against a baseline or “nominal” model before drawing health conclusions [3, 5]. 

## 2.3 Nominal TGT (NTGT) 

Nominal turbine gas temperature NTGT is the baseline (healthy) temperature predicted from observed controls/operating conditions (ambient state, Mach/altitude, shaft speeds, fuel flow, etc.). In practice, NTGT is generated either by (i) an adapted thermo-system model (gas-path analysis) [5, 13] or (ii) a learned base-line regressor trained on healthy fleet data [14]. Formally, for a feature vector 

xt of operating and environmental variables, the baseline regressor has the form 

[TGT N,t = f (xt; θ), (1) where f (·) represents the baseline model (physics-based or data-driven) and θ its parameters. Baseline modeling is central to separating environmental/operational effects from health effects [3, 5, 14]. 

## 2.4 Delta TGT (DTGT) 

Given the measured TGT t and its nominal counterpart [TGT N,t , the residual is defined as DTGT t = TGT t − [TGT N,t . (2) This “delta” is a standard gas-path residual (measured minus baseline) used to trend degradation, trigger alerts, and support fault isolation [3, 5]. Because DTGT largely removes confounding from ambient and mission profiles, persis-tent positive drift is indicative of shrinking thermal margin and evolving loss mechanisms (e.g., compressor fouling or turbine efficiency loss) [3, 12]. Robust baseline estimation is therefore critical to high-fidelity DTGT modeling [14]. 42.5 Remaining Useful Life (RUL) 

RUL is the time from now until an asset’s health trajectory meets a failure or maintenance threshold. Canonical estimation approaches include model-based (state-space and physics-of-failure) and data-driven (statistical/ML) methods, whereas hybrid schemes combine both [15, 16]. Reviews of the RUL literature detail degradation process modeling, covariate effects, censored operation, learn-ing from fleets, and evaluation metrics [15, 16]. Moreover, the “best” approach depends on data availability, observability of degradation, and the decision con-text. In thermal-margin monitoring, DTGT (or analogous deltas) often serves as an interpretable health indicator that feeds the prognostic model. 

## 2.6 Uncertainty Quantification (UQ) 

Uncertainty quantification (UQ) refers to characterizing how confident a model is in its predictions—for example by outputting predictive distributions or pre-diction intervals whose empirical coverage can be evaluated. UQ is indispens-able for EHM because maintenance decisions are risk-based. Two complemen-tary views are prevalent. (1) In statistical learning, one quantifies predictive dispersion via probabilistic regression, ensembling, Bayesian methods, or pre-diction intervals; quality is judged by calibration and coverage/width trade-offs [17,18]. (2) In PHM, uncertainty sources (initial state, model form/parameters, future loads, sensor noise) are parsed and propagated to RUL distributions; both Bayesian and reliability-based viewpoints are used [19]. For deep models, aleatoric (data) and epistemic (model) uncertainty are commonly distinguished and jointly modeled [20]. In this work, prediction intervals are reported for both health indicators (e.g., DTGT) and RUL, enabling risk-aware decisions such as 

P(RUL < τ alarm ). 

Figure 2: Illustration of prediction intervals for a time series of Turbine Gas Temperature (TGT) records versus predictions. 5Figure 3: Illustration of different UQ scenarios. (1.) Valid coverage but in-accurate prediction. (2.) Valid coverage but unusable prediction width. (3.) 

Inaccurate prediction and invalid coverage. (4.) Accurate prediction and opti-mized valid coverage. EHM relies on comparing measured gas-path variables to trustworthy nomi-nal baselines; the residual DTGT is a health-sensitive, operation-normalized in-dicator. RUL models translate such health indicators into time-to-threshold pre-dictions, while principled UQ communicates confidence and supports decision-making. The proposed methods in this paper build directly on these founda-tions. Recent studies show that nominally well-calibrated uncertainty estimates may deteriorate under dataset shift, motivating explicit evaluation across op-erating regimes [21]. In addition to coverage-based diagnostics, proper scoring rules provide principled evaluation of probabilistic forecasts [22], and conformal prediction offers distribution-free prediction intervals under exchangeability as-sumptions [23]. 

# 3 Data-Driven RUL Prognostics for Turbofan Engines 

Scope and Dataset Conventions Most deep-learning approaches for pre-dicting remaining useful life (RUL) of aero engines are developed and evaluated on NASA’s turbofan simulation datasets [24]. The dataset terminology in this paper follows that of [24] while avoiding shorthand split codes: when necessary, it denotes “single-operating-condition” or “multi-operating-condition” subsets of C–MAPSS, and “single-fault” versus “multi-fault” settings. N–CMAPSS de-notes the higher-fidelity benchmark dataset. 

## 3.1 Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) 

In [25], Giduthuri et al. introduce one of the first CNN regressors for mul-tivariate engine time series, applying one-dimensional convolutions along time to learn features directly from raw sensors. A strength of the approach is its end-to-end feature learning for RUL without hand-crafted indicators. However, 6the approach offers no pathway for quantifying uncertainty. Moreover, success is demonstrated only on simulated C–MAPSS data. A widely used deep-learning baseline in this category is the convolutional ap-proach of Li et al. [26], which demonstrates strong point-estimation performance on C–MAPSS but does not explicitly optimize calibrated prediction interval cov-erage. In [27], DeVol et al. adapt Inception CNNs to one-dimensional time se-ries and validate their success on the N–CMAPSS benchmark. A strength of the approach is achieving competitive accuracy on high-fidelity data using par-allel multi-scale temporal filters. A limitation of this approach is the lack of model-based explainability. Additionally, while the framework is competitively accurate, its predictions do not include quantified uncertainty. In [28], Solis-Martin et al. leverage two stacked CNNs for RUL prediction. The first CNN extracts features from normalized raw data streams, while the second CNN performs RUL regression. Strengths of this approach include incor-porating k-fold cross validation for model parameter selection, with Bayesian op-timization enabling confidence intervals for RUL predictions. The framework’s lower performance on the hidden validation set of C–MAPSS compared with the cross-validation score indicates possible overfitting on the training dataset. 

## 3.2 Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and CNN Hybrids 

In [29], Hong et al. combine CNN, LSTM, and bi-directional LSTM layers into one framework for RUL prediction on the C–MAPSS dataset. A strength of the approach is leveraging Shapley additive explanation (SHAP) techniques to identify input variables that have a significant impact on prediction results. Although the approach offers post-hoc explainability, it does not provide any quantified measures of uncertainty. In [30], Peng et al. use CNN and LSTM in parallel fashion to provide RUL prediction on the C–MAPSS single- and multi-condition datasets. Data from C–MAPSS are preprocessed, then used as input variables for both a CNN and an LSTM. The subsequent outputs of these networks are then passed into a deep fully connected CNN for RUL regression. A strength of this approach is its use of the CNN branch of the architecture for spatial input data, and likewise the LSTM branch for temporal input data. Uncertainty quantification is not addressed in the paper. In [31], Li et al. improve upon the CNN and LSTM hybrid architecture by incorporating a convolutional block attention module (CBAM). This CBAM module is placed between the CNN and LSTM to identify key variables related to RUL. Results on the C–MAPSS data show an improvement in accuracy compared to prior approaches. There is no formal prediction interval coverage or reliability assessment. 73.3 Attention Mechanism 

In [32], Da Costa et al. propose a global-attention LSTM for turbofan degra-dation with interpretable time-step weights. A strength of this approach is its ability to yield competitive RUL prediction without requiring previous degrada-tion information. Visual inspection of the attention weights offers insight into the architecture’s focus on input sensor data throughout the lookback window of input data. In [33], Tian et al. introduce a spatial-correlation and temporal-attention LSTM that models inter-sensor relations jointly. A strength of this approach is its stronger inductive bias for multivariate coupling. However, attention weights are not a guarantee of feature importance, and correlation does not imply cau-sation. Success is demonstrated via the C–MAPSS dataset. In [34], Qin et al. put forth their Temporal Deep Degradation Network (TDDN) to learn attention-mechanism-enhanced latent degradations over time. The TDDN is a neural network with a one-dimensional CNN front-end, fully connected layers in the middle, and an attention layer on the back end. At-tention weights are visualized through the life cycle of the engine, ranging from healthy to failure, highlighting how the model focuses on the moving window of input data as the engine deteriorates. This paper does not treat uncertainty quantification or prediction interval coverage. In [35], Wang et al. combine CNN-Channel Attention Mechanism (CNN-CAM) and Gated Recurrent Unit Self-Attention Mechanism (GRU-SAM) for a dual attention approach to RUL prediction. Spatial features are extracted via the CNN-CAM, whereas temporal features are extracted from GRU-SAM. A strength of this approach is its ability to improve prediction accuracy by dynamically assigning different weights to both spatial and temporal features. Success is demonstrated through the C–MAPSS dataset, albeit without quan-tified uncertainty. 

## 3.4 Autoencoders 

In [36], Liu et al. present a Sparse Autoencoder Temporal Convolutional Net-work (SAE-TCN) to predict RUL in the C–MAPSS dataset. A strength of this approach is using the autoencoder to denoise data and extract features, while the TCN part of the network trains on low-dimensional data provided by the autoencoder. Accuracy metrics are provided for pointwise prediction without uncertainty intervals and without coverage metrics. In [37], Fan et al. introduce their two-stage attention-based hierarchical transformer (STAR) framework. Their STAR methodology is a hierarchical encoder–decoder with a two-stage attention block that first captures tempo-ral relations, then sensor-wise relations, alongside multi-scale (patch-merging) temporal abstraction. Success is demonstrated via comprehensive experimen-tal results on all standard C–MAPSS datasets. The STAR architecture does not account for uncertainty quantification in its predictions. This line of work ultimately traces to the transformer self-attention architecture introduced by 8Vaswani et al. [38]. 

## 3.5 Trends of Prior Approaches 

A clear trajectory in the literature is the shift from local, short-horizon temporal feature extraction toward architectures that can represent long-range degrada-tion dynamics. Early work often relied on 1D CNNs applied along the time axis [25], which can effectively capture local temporal motifs but are limited in their effective receptive field. These approaches progressively gave way to CNN–LSTM hybrids and attention-augmented recurrent models [29, 31–33], as well as temporal convolutional networks (TCNs) designed to extend tempo-ral context without recurrence [36]. More recently, hierarchical Transformer designs that explicitly separate temporal attention from sensor-wise attention have emerged [37]. Overall, the dominant trend is toward systematically in-creasing temporal receptive field and representational capacity so that models can leverage longer degradation trajectories rather than only short-term corre-lations. At the same time, sensor-wise structure has become increasingly explicit in model design. Rather than treating multivariate sensor streams as an un-structured feature vector, many works now incorporate a notion of “spatial” (sensor) structure through dedicated CNN fusion pathways or sensor-wise at-tention mechanisms [30, 31, 37]. This architectural choice reflects the reality that turbofan sensors are correlated and that operating-context variability can induce structured patterns across channels. In contrast, explainability is typ-ically introduced as an add-on rather than a native design principle: SHAP and feature-selection pipelines are commonly applied post hoc [29], and while attention maps can highlight salient time steps, they do not guarantee causal importance [32, 33]. Empirically, the field remains strongly benchmark-driven, with most studies relying on C–MAPSS and a smaller subset evaluating on the newer N–CMAPSS with more realistic flight profiles [27]; as a result, robust-ness to non-stationary operating regimes is often less explored than tuning for benchmark performance. Finally, uncertainty is rarely calibrated in a way that supports decision-making: most approaches do not center uncertainty quan-tification (UQ) objectives, and coverage guarantees, interval calibration, and reliability under distribution shift are typically not reported [21]. 

## 3.6 Gaps and Opportunities 

One major opportunity is to elevate calibrated uncertainty and reliability to first-class objectives in turbofan prognostics. While contemporary models of-ten emphasize point accuracy, they seldom deliver calibrated prediction inter-vals or reliability metrics under distribution shift, leaving a gap between strong benchmark results and actionable maintenance decision support. This motivates integrating mean–variance estimation (MVE), conformal calibration, deep en-sembles, and proper interval scoring into turbofan RUL workflows, alongside 9explicit reporting of coverage and width behavior under both in-distribution and shifted conditions. Another opportunity is to expand turbofan prognostics beyond single-task RUL prediction to multi-task learning over complementary, physically mean-ingful targets—for example turbine gas temperature indicators (TGT/DTGT), degradation rates, and RUL—using shared backbones that can regularize rep-resentations and yield interpretable, engineering-relevant outputs. In addition, generalization across operating regimes remains under-tested: although multi-operating-condition subsets exist, systematic cross-regime validation and ex-plicit domain-shift studies (e.g., covariate or conditional shift) are still uncom-mon, suggesting room for methods that target domain robustness or meta-learning. There is also a gap in physics- and policy-awareness, since monotone RUL trajectories, maintenance thresholds, and cost-aware decision constraints are rarely encoded; architectures that enforce or post-process monotonicity and explicitly connect predictions to maintenance-policy objectives could improve trustworthiness. Finally, interpretability methods could be strengthened be-yond attention and post-hoc SHAP/feature selection [29], for example through task-specific sensitivity analyses and counterfactual probes that more directly support engineering rationale and hypothesis testing. 

## 3.7 Literature Synthesis 

Across a decade, RUL research progressed from temporal CNNs to hybrid CNN– RNNs, to TCNs and Transformers. The consistent gains come from (i) enlarging temporal context, (ii) modeling sensor-wise structure explicitly, and (iii) mod-est use of post-hoc interpretability. However, the literature rarely addresses calibrated uncertainty, policy-aware monotonicity, and cross-regime robustness. The presented framework in this paper answers these gaps with a multi-task, attention-equipped temporal backbone whose outputs (network heads) produce both point predictions and calibrated uncertainties, evaluated under operating-regime shifts with engineering-aligned metrics and constraints. Table 1 provides a tabular summary of the prior approaches discussed in this literature review. 

Positioning relative to foundational deep-learning and UQ literature 

Foundational deep-learning approaches such as deep convolutional networks for RUL prediction [26] and self-attention transformer sequence models [38] moti-vate many of the architectures in Table 1. While these models can achieve strong point-estimation accuracy on C–MAPSS, they are often evaluated primarily un-der i.i.d. assumptions, and calibrated uncertainty under dataset shift is less fre-quently examined. Empirical evidence shows that common uncertainty estima-tors can fail under dataset shift [21], underscoring the need for calibration-aware evaluation. Beyond coverage-based diagnostics, proper scoring rules provide a principled basis for evaluating probabilistic forecasts [22]. Distribution-free conformal prediction methods offer complementary coverage guarantees under exchangeability assumptions, but can trade off sharpness for validity [23]. 10 3.8 Strengths, limitations, and novelty of the present work 

The proposed framework contributes a unified multi-head SciML model that couples data-driven feature learning with task-aligned probabilistic objectives (MVE regression, exponential degradation, and Weibull survival). A key novelty is the inclusion of a differentiable coverage–width regularizer in the training loss, enabling direct optimization of interval reliability rather than purely post hoc reporting. The paper also emphasizes phase/segment-level analysis of UQ and anomaly detection to better reflect operational interpretability. Limitations in-clude reliance on non-run-to-failure real-world proprietary data and parametric Gaussian interval assumptions for the MVE heads; future work should vali-date on additional fleets and consider non-Gaussian or distribution-free interval constructions. 

# 4 Methodology 

## 4.1 One-dimensional Convolution with Residual Blocks and Max Pooling 

Let Xt−L+1: t ∈ RL×d denote the lookback window of length L and feature dimension d ending at time t. A residual temporal block applies two 1D convo-lutions and a skip connection: 

U(ℓ) = σ



BN  W (ℓ)2 ∗ σ BN( W (ℓ)1 ∗ Z(ℓ)) 

+ Z(ℓ), (3) 

where ∗ is convolution along the time axis, W (ℓ)1 , W (ℓ)2 are convolution kernels at block ℓ, BN( ·) is batch normalization, σ(·) is a pointwise nonlinearity (e.g., ReLU), Z(ℓ) is the block input of shape RT (ℓ)×w(ℓ)

, and U(ℓ) has the same shape. Max pooling with stride spool reduces length via T (ℓ+1) = T (ℓ)/s pool 

,and Z(ℓ+1) is typically a linear map of U(ℓ) to the desired channel width. After 

D blocks with spool = 2, 

T ′ = L/ 2D , (4) 

where T ′ is the post-CNN sequence length passed to the recurrent backbone. Residual CNNs follow [39]. 

## 4.2 Residual Bi-directional Long Short-Term Memory 

Given CNN features Z ∈ RT ′×w, a bidirectional LSTM layer produces for-ward/backward states −→

h i, ←−

h i for i = 1 , . . . , T ′, and outputs 

hi = −→

h i; ←−

h i

 ∈ Rh. (5) Stacking with residual connections yields 

H(0) = Z, U(ℓ) = BiLSTM (ℓ) H(ℓ−1) , (6) 

H(ℓ) = U(ℓ) + H(ℓ−1) , ℓ = 1 , . . . , L rnn , (7) 11 where BiLSTM (ℓ)(·) is the ℓ-th bidirectional LSTM with hidden size h, H(ℓ) ∈

RT ′×h is the residual output, and Lrnn is the number of stacked layers [40, 41]. 

## 4.3 Attention Pooling 

A single-head additive attention produces a fixed-size summary from H =

H(Lrnn ):

ei = v⊤ tanh( W hi + b),αi = exp( ei)

PT ′ 

> j=1

exp( ej ) ,

c = 

> T′

X

> i=1

αi hi. (8) 

where W ∈ Ra×h, b ∈ Ra, and v ∈ Ra are trainable attention parameters, 

αi ∈ (0 , 1) are weights that sum to one, and c ∈ Rh is the context vector used by downstream heads [42]. 

## 4.4 Mean–Variance Estimation (MVE) using the Gaus-sian Negative Log-Likelihood Loss Function 

For any scalar target y, the head outputs ( μ, σ ) and models 

y | c ∼ N  μ(c), σ (c)2,

LNLL = 12



log 2 π + 2 log σ + (y−μ)2

> σ2



. (9) 

where μ(·) and σ(·) > 0 are neural outputs, LNLL is the negative log-likelihood loss function with a given statistical assumption (i.e. Gaussian). A two-sided PI at level 1 − α is [ μ − z1−α/ 2σ, μ + z1−α/ 2σ] with zq the standard-normal quantile [43]. 

## 4.5 Exponential Degradation 

A common degradation law uses exponential growth (or decay): 

s(t) = A e Bt , tγ = 1

B log 

 γA



. (10) 

where s(t) is the indicator at operational age t, A > 0 is amplitude, B > 0 is rate, 

γ > 0 is a threshold, and tγ is the first crossing time [44]. 12 4.6 Weibull Survival 

Let T denote the time-to-event. The Weibull survival, density, and hazard are, respectively, 

S(t) = exp 

h

−(t/λ )ki

, f (t) = kλ

 tλ

k−1

exp 

h

−(t/λ )ki

, (11) 

h(t) = f (t)

S(t) = kλ

 tλ

k−1

. (12) With observed ( ti, δ i), the right-censored log-likelihood is 

ℓ = X

> i

n

δi log f (ti | k, λ ) + (1 − δi) log S(ti | k, λ )

o

, (13) 

where k > 0 and λ > 0 are shape and scale; δi = 1 for events, 0 for censoring. Weibull modeling is standard in reliability [45, 46]. 

## 4.7 Evaluation Metrics for Uncertainty Quantification 

Given targets and prediction intervals (PIs) {(yn, [ℓn, u n]) }Nn=1 , evaluation met-rics are defined as follows PICP = 1

N

> N

X

> n=1

1{ℓn ≤ yn ≤ un}, (14) MPIW = 1

N

> N

X

> n=1

(un − ℓn), (15) NMPIW = 1

N

> N

X

> n=1

(un − ℓn)

R , (16) Here, 95% PIs (i.e., using z0.975 = 1 .96 in (29)) are used as a standard statistical convention. where PICP is the prediction interval coverage probability, MPIW is the mean PI width, NMPIW is the normalized width (with R the observed target range), 1{·} is an indicator function, and N is the sample size [47]. The coverage width-based criterion (CWC) summarizes the sharpness–coverage tradeoff: CWC = NMPIW 

h

1 + αc exp  −βc(PICP − γcov )i

, (17) 

where γcov ∈ (0 , 1) is a target coverage and αc, β c > 0 tune the penalty as coverage falls below the target [17]. 

Differentiable soft coverage surrogate To include coverage behavior di-rectly in the training objective, the hard indicator is replaced in (14) with a 13 Figure 4: Novel multi-objective Engine Health Management neural network architecture. smooth surrogate that is differentiable with respect to the interval bounds: 

S(x) := 11 + exp( −x) , (18) 

ecn = S τ (yn − ℓn) S τ (un − yn), (19) 

^PICP = 1

N

> N

X

> n=1

ecn. (20) Here τ > 0 controls the smoothness (larger τ more closely approximates the hard indicator). Section 5.7 uses ^PICP in a differentiable CWC regularizer that can be optimized via backpropagation. 

# 5 Predictive Performance Degradation with Sci-entific Machine Learning and Uncertainty Quan-tification 

Architectural overview Windows of multivariate sensor data are processed to produce uncertainty-aware predictions for turbine gas temperature (TGTU), Delta Turbine Gas Temperature (DTGT), remaining useful life (RUL), and degradation/survival quantities. The proposed backbone consists of a 1-D con-volutional front-end, a residual BiLSTM stack, and an attention pooling layer; multi-objective learning task heads of the network operate on the pooled con-text. Figure 4 shows the neural network architecture. 

Architecture design rationale The architecture is designed to balance ex-pressiveness, robustness, and deployability on real fleet time series data. A con-volutional front-end serves as a learnable feature extractor and down-sampler, helping suppress high-frequency noise and reduce sequence length before recur-rent modeling. A residual bidirectional LSTM stack then captures both forward 14 and backward temporal context within the window and improves optimization stability through skip connections [39–41]. Attention pooling summarizes the se-quence into a context vector by focusing on the most informative time steps [42], which is useful when relevant degradation signatures are intermittent and phase-dependent. Finally, a shared encoder with task-specific heads supports multi-task learning, improving sample efficiency relative to training separate models for each target and promoting representations that are consistent across related health indicators. Simpler encoders (e.g., a pure CNN or a single unidirectional RNN without attention) can be effective on benchmarks, but on heterogeneous operational data they may under-represent long-range dependencies or entangle regime effects; the modular design here provides a practical compromise between capacity and interpretability. 

## 5.1 Convolutional Front-End 

Stacked Conv1D+ResBlocks map a lookback window to a shorter sequence using the operator in (3) and pooling length in (4): 

zi = gconv 

 Xt−L+1: t

, i = 1 , . . . , T ′. (21) 

where Xt−L+1: t ∈ RL×d is the window ending at t, gconv (·) denotes the concrete front-end (conv, BN, nonlinearity, pooling), zi ∈ Rw is the feature at reduced index i, and T ′ is the post-pooling length. To align the convolutional feature width w with the BiLSTM hidden dimen-sion h for residual summation, optionally apply a pointwise linear projection ˜zi = Wproj zi + bproj , ˜zi ∈ Rh, i = 1 , . . . , T ′. (22) 

## 5.2 Residual BiLSTM Backbone 

Four BiLSTM layers with a residual connection read the sequence as in (7): 

h(1) 1: T ′ = BiLSTM 1(˜ z1: T ′ ),

h(2) 1: T ′ = BiLSTM 2(h(1) 1: T ′ ) + h(1) 1: T ′ , (23) 

h(3) 1: T ′ = BiLSTM 3(h(2) 1: T ′ ) + h(2) 1: T ′ , (24) 

h(4) 1: T ′ = BiLSTM 4(h(3) 1: T ′ ) + h(3) 1: T ′ (25) 

where BiLSTM ℓ(·) is a bidirectional LSTM with hidden size h, and h(ℓ)1: T ′ denotes the hidden-state sequence output from BiLSTM layer ℓ ∈ { 1, . . . , 4}.15 5.3 Attention Pooling 

The attention pooling layer follows (8) to produce a context vector: 

αi = exp( v⊤h(4)  

> i

)

PT ′ 

> j=1

exp( v⊤h(4)  

> j

) , 

> T′

X

> i=1

αi = 1 , (26) 

c = 

> T′

X

> i=1

αi h(4)  

> i

. (27) 

where v ∈ Rh is a learned attention vector, αi are weights over T ′ steps, and 

c ∈ Rh is the pooled context [42]. 

## 5.4 Mean–Variance Estimation (MVE) Heads 

For any scalar regression target y (TGTU, DTGT, or RUL), the Gaussian neg-ative log-likelihood implied by (9) is used to obtain head parameters by mini-mizing 

LNLL (μ, σ ; y) = 12



log(2 π) + 2 log σ + (y − μ)2

σ2



, (28) 

where μ = μ(c) and σ = σ(c) > 0 are head outputs conditioned on c, and y is the supervised target. At confidence level 1 − α, the analytic PI is 

ℓ = μ − z1−α/ 2 σ, u = μ + z1−α/ 2 σ. (29) 

where zq is the standard normal quantile, and ℓ, u are the PI bounds. 

## 5.5 Exponential Degradation Head 

The head follows the generic law in (10): 

s(t) = A e Bt , tγ = 1

B log 

 γA



. (30) 

where s(t) is the indicator at age t, A > 0 is amplitude, B > 0 is rate, γ > 0 is a threshold, and tγ is the crossing time [44]. 

## 5.6 Weibull Survival Head 

The network’s survival head adopts (12): 

S(t) = exp 

h

−(t/λ )ki

, h(t) = kλ

 tλ

k−1

. (31) 

where k, λ > 0 are shape and scale, respectively. 16 5.7 Multitask Objective with Learned Weights 

Let T denote the set of prediction heads (tasks) and let Lk be the loss for task k ∈ T . For MVE regression heads (TGTU, DTGT, and RUL), the Gaus-sian negative log-likelihood (NLL) is minimized in (28) and augmented with a differentiable coverage–width regularizer: 

Lk = LNLL ,k + λcwc CWC soft  

> k

, k ∈ T MVE , (32) 

where λcwc ≥ 0 is a tunable weight, TMVE = {TGTU , DTGT , RUL }, and CWC soft  

> k

is a differentiable analogue of the CWC metric in (17). Using the PI bounds from (29), the mini-batch soft coverage is computed as ^PICP k us-ing (20) (a smooth approximation to (14)) and the normalized mean PI width NMPIW k using (16). The regularizer is then CWC soft  

> k

= NMPIW k

h

1 + αc exp  −βc(^PICP k − γcov )i

. (33) Because ^PICP k is differentiable with respect to the PI bounds ( ℓn,k , u n,k ), the CWC term can be backpropagated and optimized jointly with the NLL. Finally, task losses are combined using learned uncertainty weights [20]: 

LMTL = X

> k∈T



e−sk Lk + sk



, (34) 

where sk are learned log-variance parameters (larger sk down-weights task k). 

# 6 Experiment Setup 

Optimizer and learning rate scheduler Training is conducted with AdamW and cosine scheduling [48]; gradient clipping stabilizes the BiLSTM stack; hyper-parameters (number of layers, h, dropout, attention) are selected by a manual, iterative investigation of network configurations not detailed in this paper. 

Reproducibility Data splits are logged, scalers are serialized, and best per-forming models are saved as pickle files. 

Dataset splitting One hundred twenty-two engines comprise the overall dataset. For each engine, data are available in three different flight phases: takeoff, climb, and cruise. Additionally, for each flight phase, there are various flight segments ranging from one to six. In other words, the overall time series of flight records is partitioned by scheduled maintenance overhauls. This partitioning is what creates the segments. Training, validation, and test datasets are split by unique engine ID. Split-ting in this manner avoids data leakage, since all flight phases and flight seg-ments for one given engine stay within a given dataset split. Figure 6 illustrates 17 how the data are split using a 70/15/15 ratio for training, validation, and test, respectively. Specifically, this translates to 85 engine IDs used for training, 18 engine IDs used for validation, and 19 engine IDs used for testing (remainders are allocated to the test dataset). For simplicity, rows with missing data are removed. Data imputation methods are explored but are not detailed in this paper. The input and target variables are detailed in Table 2. Select input variables are not passed into the RUL head of the network to prevent data leakage. Robust data scaling is used as a preprocessing step. Scaling data helps the network converge on solutions faster and improves predictive performance. Robust scaling is used because it is based on percentiles and consequently is not impacted by a small number of large outliers, unlike scaling based on minimum and maximum values [49, 50]. After robust scaling, each sensor channel is detrended using a (linear) Kalman filter with a constant-velocity state model to separate a smooth trend from higher-frequency residuals [51, 52]. Let the latent trend state be mt = [ pt vt]⊤

(position and velocity) and the measurement be yt, thus giving 

mt = F m t−1 + wt, yt = H m t + νt, (35) with F =

1 ∆t

0 1



and H = [1 0]. The detrended value is defined as ˜ yt = yt − ˆpt,where ˆ pt is the filtered estimate of pt.After detrending, the data are reformatted into time-series sequences, with a sliding window consisting of twenty-four observations per window, and an overlapping stride of one observation [53]. One data observation is equivalent to one flight cycle. A window size of twenty-four was chosen to balance the amount of short-term and long-term trends the network sees during training. A stride of one was chosen to maximize the number of sequences created for network training purposes. Next, DTGT thresholds are investigated for the purposes of creating hazard events as a target variable. This created target variable is used to train the Weibull hazard head of the network, whose hazard function is given in (31). 

Data-driven DTGT thresholding for Weibull survival First, it is im-portant to establish a healthy baseline for each engine–phase–segment by taking a prefix consisting of the first 100 samples or the first 20% of the segment— whichever is smaller. Let T be the segment length and define the prefix H =

{xt}Lt=1 with L = min(100 , ⌈0.2 T ⌉). From H, robust location and scale are com-puted: the center is the median ˜ μ = median( H), and the spread is the median absolute deviation (MAD) rescaled to a standard-deviation equivalent, ˆσ = 1 .4826 · median {| x − ˜μ| : x ∈ H} . (36) a choice that is resistant to outliers yet statistically consistent under normality [54–57]. 18 Next, a robust Shewhart-style control limit for detection is formed. The DTGT threshold is thr = max(floor , ˜μ + k ˆσ) , (37) where k > 0 is a tunable sigma-multiplier (similarly to the “ kσ ” idea from Statistical Process Control (SPC)) and floor is a fixed lower bound that prevents the threshold from collapsing toward zero on extremely quiet baselines. This is the robust analogue of a “mean + kσ ” Shewhart limit computed from the healthy baseline of the signal after scheduled service (the nominal engine) while adding a quiet-floor safeguard [54, 56, 58]. To convert threshold exceedances into events suitable for survival modeling, a runs-rule is applied. A “hazard” is declared at the first time index te at which there are m consecutive samples above the threshold, 

> m−1

Y

> j=0

(xte−j > thr) = 1 , (38) and no hazard is recorded if such a run never occurs. This mirrors the West-ern Electric runs tests that are used on control charts to raise specificity and suppress spurious single-point alarms near the limit [59, 60]. Finally, a preprocessing parameter sweep over the three knobs ( k, floor , m ) is performed. For each combination, three diagnostic metrics are computed. First, the Health Exceedance Rate (HER) is the fraction of prefix samples above the threshold, HER = 1

L

> L

X

> t=1

1(xt > thr) . (39) Second, event windows pct is the proportion of windows belonging to an event run. Third, segments event pct is the proportion of segments containing at least one event (first crossing). Table 3 provides more detail on these variables. A desirable result balances the false-alarm control against the number of usable positives for learning. These statistics allow practitioners to select thresholds consistent with in-house preferences for conservatism versus sensitivity while ensuring the survival model receives enough positive signal to learn [54, 56, 58– 60]. 

Parameter-sweep analysis Using the sweep table shown in Table 4, the floor 

parameter dominates: for this dataset, any floor value ≥ 5 eliminates detections entirely, meaning HER = 0%, event windows pct = 0, and segments event pct = 0. That “quiet floor” behavior aligns with SPC intuition: fixed lower limits can suppress signals from small but genuine shifts near the baseline, as emphasized in Shewhart-style control and run-rules guidance. With floor = 0, the sigma-multiplier k trades off false alerts in the healthy prefix against the prevalence of events. In these data, k = 4 .0 yields a HER ≈ 0.10%, failures pct legacy ≈ 8.39%, event windows pct ≈ 0.0139, and segments event pct 

≈ 33 .33%, making for a balanced operating point with low false alarms yet 19 Algorithm 1: Creation of Target Variables: Robust DTGT Threshold & Hazard Event 

Input : Time series x1: T of DTGT. 

Parameters: k (sigma multiplier); 

m (consecutive run length, e.g., m=3); 

floor (absolute threshold minimum); 

first n (default 100); 

φ (healthy prefix fraction, default 0 .2). 

Output : Threshold thr ; hazard flag hazard ∈ { true , false }; first hazard time te (or None ). 

Healthy prefix length: L ← min( first n , ⌈φT ⌉); 

H ← { xt}Lt=1 // prefix assumed ‘‘healthy’’ 

Robust center: ˜μ ← median( H); 

MAD: MAD ← median x∈H {| x − ˜μ|} ;

Scale to σ: ˆσ ← 1.4826 × MAD // normal-consistency 

Threshold: thr ← max  floor , ˜μ + k ˆσ

hazard ← false ; te ← None 

for t ← m, . . . , T do if Qm−1 

> j=0

1(xt−j > thr ) = 1 then 

hazard ← true ; te ← t; break return thr , hazard , te

Figure 5: Deterioration thresholds and hazard events are created using data-driven statistical process control. Parameterized target variables enable in-house adjustment to proprietary threshold information. enough positives for the Weibull model to learn. A looser k = 3 .5 increases HER and event rates (more positives), whereas a stricter k = 4 .5 reduces them (fewer positives). This knob, together with the consecutive-run length m (a Western Electric–style rule), provides an interpretable, tunable way to align detection specificity with in-house policy and quality-control doctrine rooted in Shewhart control chart, Statistical Process Control, and run-rules practice. 20 RUL target construction For each engine/phase/segment trajectory, the end-of-segment index tEOL is defined as the final observed cycle before the next scheduled maintenance/overhaul. A simple and commonly used target is the remaining number of cycles until that event, RUL t = tEOL − t, t = 1 , . . . , t EOL , (40) optionally clipped or re-parameterized to match in-house policy constraints (Fig-ure 7). 

Figure 6: Engine Health Management data are split by unique engine serial number using a ratio of 70%, 15%, and 15% for training, validation, and test datasets, respectively. 

Figure 7: Creation of Remaining Useful Life (RUL) target variables. Parame-terized target RUL variables are tunable per in-house specifications. 21 Figure 8: Predicted TGTU versus Engine Health Management TGTU (ground truth) with prediction intervals for engine B’s climb phase during segment 4. 

Figure 9: Predicted TGTU versus Engine Health Management TGTU (ground truth) with prediction intervals for engine S’s takeoff phase during segment 3. 

Figure 10: Predicted DTGT versus Engine Health Management DTGT (ground truth) with prediction intervals for engine B’s cruise phase during segment 4. 22 Figure 11: Predicted RUL versus Engine Health Management RUL (ground truth) with prediction intervals for engine B’s cruise phase during segment 4. 

Figure 12: Predicted RUL versus Engine Health Management RUL (ground truth) with prediction intervals for engine O’s takeoff phase during segment 2. 

Figure 13: Predicted DTGT versus Engine Health Management DTGT (ground truth) with prediction intervals for engine S’s takeoff phase during segment 2. 23 Figure 14: Remaining Useful Life Probability Distribution. 

# 7 Results 

Across the board, the presented framework produces excellent CWC evalua-tion metrics, with values often falling below one. However, the median CWC (MED-CWC) values reported in Tables 7 to 11 occasionally take on very large magnitudes (spanning multiple orders of magnitude). This behavior follows di-rectly from the CWC definition in Equation (17): CWC scales an interval-width term by an exponential penalty when empirical coverage (PICP) falls below the target coverage γ (set by the chosen PI level). When results are stratified by flight phase, segment, and/or engine ID, the sample size per subset can be much smaller than the full test set, so PICP can deviate from γ due to only a modest number of misses; the exponential term in Equation (17) can then amplify that deviation into orders-of-magnitude increases in CWC. This effect is visible already in the segment-level summary in Table 7, where TGTU in segments 1 and 6 combines relatively small normalized widths (NMPIW 

≈ 0.14–0 .15) with reduced coverage (PICP 0 .76 and 0 .71), producing MED-CWC values of 4.40e5 and 2.30e4. The engine-level stratifications in Tables 8 and 11 show that such outliers are concentrated in specific engines and phases (often takeoff and climb), including multiple engine–phase pairs with PICP far below nominal coverage. The most granular breakdown in Table 10 further lo-calizes these cases to specific engine/phase/segment combinations, confirming that the largest MED-CWC penalties align with the lowest-PICP subsets. Importantly, once the exponential penalty dominates, the absolute magni-tude of MED-CWC is best interpreted as a calibration-failure indicator rather than a physically meaningful scale: differences between, say, 1.00e12 and 1.00e15 mainly reflect how far a subset’s coverage falls below γ, not subtle changes in interval sharpness. Moreover, because median CWC is reported, a large MED-CWC typically indicates that under-coverage is systematic for that subset (not driven by a single anomalous prediction). In practice, these outliers suggest lo-calized miscalibration and/or a distribution shift in those operating conditions (e.g., strong transients, uncommon regimes, or sensor/segmentation artifacts). For deployment, these results motivate monitoring MED-CWC alongside the component metrics (PICP and MPIW/NMPIW) and applying targeted recal-24 ibration or investigation for engine/phase/segment combinations with persis-tently low coverage. Table 5 summarizes aggregate predictive accuracy and interval quality across the three tasks. The model attains mean absolute errors of 6 .00 ◦C for DTGT and 6 .84 ◦C for TGTU, and 531 cycles for RUL. Empirical coverage (PICP) ranges from 0 .86 to 0 .98, while MPIW/NMPIW and MED-CWC quantify how wide the PIs must be to achieve that coverage. Table 6 breaks these metrics down by flight phase, revealing phase-dependent difficulty. Takeoff exhibits the largest temperature errors (TGTU MAE 8 .39 ◦C, DTGT MAE 7 .23 ◦C) and the lowest TGTU coverage (PICP 0 .79), consistent with strong transients; cruise yields the lowest TGTU MAE (5 .00 ◦C) but the largest RUL MAE (681 cycles). These trends motivate phase-aware calibration and/or loss weighting. Table 7 further decomposes performance by flight segment index, showing that both accuracy and calibration vary across segments. For example, TGTU MAE ranges from 4 .95 ◦C (segment 5) to 10 .14 ◦C (segment 6), and segments 1 and 6 exhibit low TGTU PICP (0 .76 and 0 .71) with very large MED-CWC penalties, indicating that interval calibration for TGTU is particularly chal-lenging in those segments. 25 Table 1: Literature review overview. 

Paper Model family Data Key idea/feature Typical limitations 

[25] CNN (1D temporal) C–MAPSS (sim) End-to-end tem-poral feature extraction from raw sensors No UQ; simulation-only; limited regime analysis [27] Inception CNN (1D) N– CMAPSS Multi-scale tempo-ral filters; strong challenge results No explainability/UQ; point estimates [28] Stacked DCNN Challenge data (tur-bofan) Two-level CNN: extractor then re-gressor; Bayesian Optimization for selection Single-task; calibra-tion not addressed [29] CNN+LSTM (xAI) C–MAPSS Dimensionality re-duction + Shap-ley additive expla-nation (SHAP) ex-planations Post-hoc xAI; no inter-val coverage [30] LSTM + FCN fusion C–MAPSS Temporal (LSTM) + sensor-wise (CNN) feature fusion Heuristic fusion; no UQ [32] Attention LSTM C–MAPSS Global temporal attention for inter-pretability Attention ̸ = causality; calibration absent [33] Spatial-temporal LSTM C–MAPSS Inter-sensor corre-lation + temporal attention Complexity; no relia-bility guarantees [31] CNN– LSTM +CBAM C–MAPSS Channel & spa-tial attention be-fore LSTM Point-only; no shift analysis [36] SAE–TCN C–MAPSS Denoising + long-range temporal convolutions Lacks calibrated UQ; transfer underexplored [34] Degradation-attention net C–MAPSS Learns latent degradation dy-namics with attention Assumptions implicit; no calibration [37] Hierarchical Trans-former C–MAPSS Two-stage (tem-poral then sensor-wise) attention; multi-scale Heavy; inter-vals/coverage not reported [35] CNN+GRU dual atten-tion C–MAPSS Channel attention (spatial) + self-attention (tempo-ral) General-purpose; turbofan-specific shift not deep-dived 

26 Table 2: Input and target variables. 

Variable Units Description Input variables 

N1 Percentage Low pressure spool speed (LP) N2 Percentage Intermediate pressure spool speed (IP) N3 Percentage High pressure spool speed (HP) P25 PSI Intermediate pressure compressor delivery pres-sure (IPC) P3 PSI High pressure compressor delivery pressure (HPC) P50 Pascal (Pa) Pressure T2A Kelvin (K) Temperature T3 Kelvin (K) Temperature GWT Kg Aircraft Gross Weight MN N/A Marker number for the runway 

Select input variables (excluded from the RUL head to prevent leakage) 

Cycles Since New Cycles The running total of accumulated flight cycles since the engine was new Hours Since New Hours The running total of accumulated flight hours since the engine was new 

Target variables 

TGTU Degrees Celsius Turbine gas temperature untrimmed DTGT Degrees Celsius TGTU – nominal TGT RUL Cycles Predicted cycles remaining before end of life (EOL) Survival Probability The predicted probability that the engine has not “failed” by the given time/cycle horizon 

27 Table 3: Target variables for DTGT thresholding and hazard events. 

Variable Unit Description 

HER Percentage Health Exceedance Rate. % of DTGT values inside the healthy prefix window 

that exceed the DTGT threshold. 

failures pct legacy Percentage % of windows flagged by legacy code (Boolean logic that marks hazard win-dows after the first hazard occurrence; useful for masking). 

event windows pct Percentage % of all windows that belong to an event run (i.e., any of the m successive points that satisfy the rule). 

segments event pct Percentage % of segments that contain at least one event (first–crossing) under the current ( k, floor , m ) sweep. Table 4: DTGT threshold preprocessing parameter sweep results.                                                                                                                                            

> kfloor HER failures pct legacy event windows pct segments event pct thr min thr median thr mean thr max 3.5 00.13 10.82 0.0139 36.30 00.76 0.84 2.91 3.5 5000055.00 5.00 5.00 3.5 8000088.00 8.00 8.00 3.5 10 000010 10.00 10.00 10.00 3.5 12 000012 12.00 12.00 12.00
> 4.0 00.10 8.39 0.0139 33.33 00.87 0.92 3.05
> 4.0 5000055.00 5.00 5.00 4.0 8000088.00 8.00 8.00 4.0 10 000010 10.00 10.00 10.00 4.0 12 000012 12.00 12.00 12.00 4.5 00.07 6.33 0.0141 29.63 00.99 1.00 3.21 4.5 5000055.00 5.00 5.00 4.5 8000088.00 8.00 8.00 4.5 10 000010 10.00 10.00 10.00 4.5 12 000012 12.00 12.00 12.00

Table 5: Overall Model Performance Metrics 

Task MAE PICP MPIW NMPIW CWC DTGT ( °C) 6.00 0.94 30.08 1.90 1.84 RUL (cycles) 531 0.98 2569 1.18 1.15 TGTU ( °C) 6.84 0.86 28.00 0.16 0.24 

28 Table 6: Performance Metrics by Flight Phase 

Phase Task MAE PICP MPIW NMPIW CWC Takeoff TGTU ( °C) 8.39 0.79 28.66 0.11 0.49 RUL (cycles) 523 0.97 2305 0.91 1.18 DTGT ( °C) 7.23 0.90 32.00 0.80 1.74 Climb TGTU ( °C) 6.43 0.89 26.11 0.18 0.28 RUL (cycles) 406 1.00 2444 1.79 0.88 DTGT ( °C) 5.54 0.95 29.45 0.66 1.28 Cruise TGTU ( °C) 5.00 0.94 29.11 0.19 0.21 RUL (cycles) 681 0.97 3099 0.90 2.20 DTGT ( °C) 4.71 1.00 27.93 4.89 7.01 

Table 7: Performance Metrics by Flight Segment 

Segment Task MAE PICP MPIW NMPIW CWC 1TGTU ( °C) 7.59 0.76 25.06 0.15 4.42e5 RUL (cycles) 446 0.99 3233 2.06 1.52 DTGT ( °C) 6.13 0.91 27.46 1.54 2.05 2TGTU ( °C) 5.51 0.92 28.13 0.15 0.23 RUL (cycles) 458 0.99 2274 0.73 0.93 DTGT ( °C) 5.73 0.93 27.79 2.02 1.78 3TGTU ( °C) 7.79 0.87 29.65 0.17 0.28 RUL (cycles) 705 0.97 2473 0.87 1.18 DTGT ( °C) 6.00 0.96 32.14 1.55 1.20 4TGTU ( °C) 6.58 0.97 31.02 0.16 0.20 RUL (cycles) 654 0.96 2329 0.78 1.09 DTGT ( °C) 5.92 0.98 35.31 2.30 1.70 5TGTU ( °C) 4.95 0.91 29.64 0.17 0.23 RUL (cycles) 413 0.96 1718 1.20 2.15 DTGT ( °C) 7.40 0.96 35.25 4.38 3.15 6TGTU ( °C) 10.14 0.71 27.30 0.14 2.27e4 RUL (cycles) 464 0.96 1663 0.46 0.35 DTGT ( °C) 5.93 0.95 30.24 1.09 2.99 

29 Table 8: Representative TGTU prediction metrics by engine and flight phase. The selected rows highlight the lowest-error case, the largest-error case, the lowest-coverage case, a representative low-coverage takeoff regime, and a wide-interval cruise case.                                     

> Engine Phase MAE PICP MPIW NMPIW CWC EClimb 2.22 1.00 23.40 0.24 0.24 HTakeoff 14.77 0.45 28.99 0.10 8.37e9 HClimb 11.76 0.36 22.09 0.20 1.29e12 BTakeoff 8.95 0.70 25.85 0.11 2.87e11 FCruise 6.88 0.98 36.96 0.65 0.65

Table 8 isolates TGTU performance per engine and phase. Across engine– phase pairs, MAE spans from 2 .22 ◦C (engine E, climb) to 14 .77 ◦C (engine H, takeoff), and PICP ranges from 0 .36 (engine H, climb) to 1 .00. This variability suggests that uncertainty calibration is not uniform across the fleet and that a subset of engines dominates the low-coverage behavior. Table 9 reports analogous RUL metrics per engine and phase. MAE ranges from 102 cycles (engine H, climb) to 1695 cycles (engine F, cruise), and while coverage is near unity in many cases, some scenarios such as engine S in cruise show reduced PICP (0 .78) with a large MED-CWC penalty. These per-engine results are useful for diagnosing where long-horizon uncertainty becomes overly conservative or poorly calibrated. Table 10 provides the most granular view retained in the dissertation chap-ter, decomposing TGTU performance by engine, phase, and segment. This table helps localize which specific segment–phase combinations drive the phase-and engine-level aggregates, making it suitable for root-cause analysis and for designing targeted model improvements (e.g., segment-aware augmentation or calibration). Table 11 provides a compact cross-task breakdown by engine serial num-ber, flight phase, and task, enabling identification of outlier engines or regimes without pushing the quantitative discussion outside the main Results section. The wide spread of MAE, PICP, and MED-CWC across engines highlights that aggregate metrics can mask difficult cases; these tables therefore help prioritize targeted remediation (e.g., additional data, domain adaptation, or per-engine recalibration) for the worst-performing combinations. Because these engine-level diagnostics are part of the substantive quantita-tive findings, they are kept in the main Results section rather than deferred to an appendix-style placement. The selected rows emphasize best-case behav-ior, worst-case behavior, and representative low-coverage regimes that drive the calibration trends discussed above. 30 Table 9: Representative RUL prediction metrics by engine and flight phase. The selected rows highlight the smallest and largest MAE values and several cruise regimes with reduced empirical coverage.                                     

> Engine Phase MAE PICP MPIW NMPIW CWC HClimb 102 1.00 1364 1.17 1.17 FCruise 1695 1.00 2.96e4 443.48 443.48 SCruise 862 0.78 2246 1.76 2.53e5 CCruise 797 0.84 2177 0.87 163.63 BCruise 816 0.88 2267 0.89 36.13

Table 10: Representative TGTU metrics by engine, flight phase, and segment. The selected rows correspond to the lowest-coverage engine–phase–segment com-binations in the expanded evaluation set and therefore localize the strongest calibration failures.                                                  

> Engine Phase Segment MAE PICP MPIW NMPIW CWC NClimb 1.00 15.98 0.04 21.02 0.25 1.53e19 KClimb 1.00 17.22 0.06 21.72 0.27 6.58e18 PTakeoff 1.00 19.18 0.10 23.99 0.09 2.18e17 CClimb 1.00 14.25 0.11 21.49 0.19 2.73e17 ITakeoff 2.00 17.04 0.13 24.65 0.10 7.47e16 KTakeoff 1.00 20.42 0.13 25.29 0.12 7.62e16

Table 11: Representative engine serial number, phase, and task combinations drawn from the expanded evaluation set. These rows illustrate how accuracy and calibration vary across tasks for specific engines and operating regimes.                                                  

> Engine Phase Task MAE PICP MPIW NMPIW CWC EClimb TGTU ( °C) 2.22 1.00 23.40 0.24 0.24 HTakeoff TGTU ( °C) 14.77 0.45 28.99 0.10 8.37e9 HClimb RUL (cycles) 102 1.00 1364 1.17 1.17 SCruise RUL (cycles) 862 0.78 2246 1.76 2.53e5 HTakeoff DTGT ( °C) 14.66 0.35 27.11 1.35 1.16e13 FCruise RUL (cycles) 1695 1.00 2.96e4 443.48 443.48

Figure 8 shows a representative time-series prediction for turbine gas tem-perature (TGTU) during the climb phase for engine B (segment 4). The mean estimate is shown alongside the Engine Health Management (EHM) reference while the prediction interval (PI) summarizes uncertainty at each time step; 31 regimes where the PI widens indicate conditions where the model is less certain and where additional data or calibration could be beneficial. Figure 9 provides a complementary TGTU example in takeoff for engine S,where the thermal dynamics are more transient. This qualitative case illustrates how the uncertainty band adapts during rapid changes in temperature, support-ing downstream use-cases that must balance responsiveness with robustness to measurement noise. Figure 10 visualizes predictions for DTGT in cruise for engine B. Because DTGT emphasizes deviations from nominal behavior, the overlay of the pre-dicted and EHM DTGT trajectories—together with the associated PI—provides a qualitative check that the model can follow residual trends while explicitly quantifying confidence around those deviations. Figure 11 reports remaining useful life (RUL) estimates for engine B over a representative segment. In addition to the point prediction, the PI conveys the range of plausible RUL values at each cycle, which is critical for translating model output into maintenance actions (e.g., conservative planning based on lower quantiles). Figure 12 shows RUL performance on a different engine and operating regime (takeoff for O). Presenting multiple engines/phases helps assess whether un-certainty behavior is consistent across conditions and highlights any regime-specific degradation in accuracy or calibration. Figure 13 provides a takeoff DTGT example for engine S. The predicted DTGT trajectory and PI offer a compact representation of both deviation mag-nitude and confidence, which is useful when DTGT is later fed into threshold-based degradation logic or alerting. Figure 14 illustrates the full probabilistic output for RUL in the form of a predicted probability distribution. This distributional view goes beyond a single mean value by exposing tail risk (probability of short remaining life) and enables computing prediction intervals directly from quantiles, supporting risk-aware maintenance scheduling. 

# 8 Conclusions 

This paper presents a scientific machine learning framework for turbine prognos-tics that couples high-fidelity sequence modeling with uncertainty quantification (UQ) to support robust decision-making. The proposed approach jointly mod-els turbine gas temperature untrimmed (TGTU), remaining useful life (RUL), and degradation-related quantities while producing prediction intervals (PIs) that can be evaluated and monitored using established PI metrics (e.g., PICP, MPIW, NMPIW, and CWC) [17]. 

Architecture summary The end-to-end pipeline begins with preprocessing and sequence construction (e.g., scaling/detrending and a sliding-window rep-resentation). A shared temporal encoder then maps each sensor window into a latent representation using a residual bidirectional LSTM stack followed by 32 an attention pooling mechanism. Task-specific prediction heads are attached to the shared representation. In particular, the primary prognostic targets are modeled using Mean–Variance Estimation (MVE), where each head outputs both a predictive mean and a predictive variance, enabling Gaussian predic-tive distributions and closed-form prediction intervals. Additional heads can be used to predict degradation attributes (e.g., performance level, degrada-tion rate, and time-to-threshold) within the same multi-task framework. Each encoder component addresses a specific modeling requirement: convolutional filtering/downsampling for local patterns, bidirectional recurrence for longer temporal context, and attention pooling for focusing on the most informative time steps. This modular design offers a practical compromise between simpler single-task encoders and more complex sequence models when working with heterogeneous real fleet data. 

Novel aspects Several aspects distinguish this work from more conventional prognostic pipelines: (i) a unified, multi-objective network simultaneously pre-dicts multiple health indicators (TGT, RUL, and degradation attributes) from shared representations; (ii) task trade-offs are handled in a principled way via learned task weighting, which reduces the need for manual loss-tuning in multi-task learning [20]; (iii) uncertainty is treated as a first-class output by design (via MVE), and PI quality is assessed using rigorous PI metrics such as CWC [17]; (iv) the evaluation is stratified by operational context (flight phase and mainte-nance segment), enabling data-centric interpretation beyond aggregate test-set scores; and (v) the methodology is trained and evaluated on real fleet data (not only synthetic benchmarks), which is important because field data include non-stationarity, maintenance resets, and regime shifts that can strongly affect both predictive accuracy and uncertainty calibration. 

Performance overview Across the evaluated dataset, the framework achieves low predictive error for TGTU and RUL while maintaining high PI coverage and reasonable PI width. Phase- and segment-wise analyses show that the model generalizes across operating regimes, with performance varying in in-terpretable ways as the engine progresses through different phases/segments. Notably, PI coverage remains strong overall, suggesting the learned predictive distributions remain reasonably calibrated in aggregate, with under-coverage in specific regimes. 

Observations While aggregate metrics indicate strong performance, the strat-ified analysis reveals that the median CWC can differ substantially for specific combinations of engine ID, flight phase, and flight segment. Because CWC jointly captures both coverage behavior and interval width [17], a pronounced shift in median CWC relative to the rest of the dataset suggests those subsets may be abnormal in the sense of being inherently different (e.g., a distinct op-erating regime, sensor characteristics, or sensor collection records). Given how well the network models the majority of the data, such discrepancies plausibly 33 reflect a real distributional difference localized to those data files containing the given combination of engine ID, flight phase, and flight segment. Importantly, this does not necessarily imply the data are faulty; however, it is a strong quan-titative signal that the certain engine ID/phase/segment data warrants deeper investigation. This observation naturally motivates the future-work direction of systematic abnormality detection. 

Future work Two follow-on directions are especially promising: 1. An applied survey of UQ methods for turbine gas temperature prediction. While this paper emphasizes MVE-based probabilistic regression, future work should benchmark additional UQ approaches for TGT/DTGT in a controlled, applied survey. Candidates include the major PI construction families reviewed in [17] (e.g., quantile-regression and ensemble-based in-tervals), distribution-free conformal prediction and related conformalized constructions [23], as well as modern deep-learning UQ baselines such as Monte Carlo dropout [61] and deep ensembles [62, 63]. In addition to aggregate metrics, the comparison should explicitly evaluate calibration degradation under regime shift [21] and report the accuracy–cost trade-offs that matter for deployment on turbine datasets. 2. An abnormality detection framework using CWC discrepancy monitoring. The discovered large discrepancies in median CWC motivate a dedicated abnormality detection framework. A practical extension would track PI-quality statistics (e.g., median CWC and related PI metrics) by engine ID, flight phase, flight segment, and trigger alerts when deviations exceed robust thresholds. This can be connected to established anomaly detection ideas [64] as well as uncertainty- or out-of-distribution-aware monitoring baselines [65], yielding a lightweight notification layer that flags subsets with unusually large PI degradation for targeted data and system review. 

# 9 Funding 

This research was sponsored by Rolls-Royce and Virginia Tech. 

# 10 Data Availability 

The data supporting the findings of this study were made available from Rolls-Royce plc, but restrictions apply to the availability of these data, which were used under license for the current study and are not publicly available. The point of contact for data requests is changminson@vt.edu. 34 11 Acknowledgments 

The authors would like to express sincere appreciation to Rolls-Royce for sharing Engine Health Management (EHM) data and technical insights. The authors extend special thanks to Jin-Sol Jung for technical discussion about mechanical engineering aspects pertaining to the EHM data. 

# 12 Conflict of Interest 

Authors Gavan Burke, Rekha Sundararajan, Andrew Rimell, and Gregory Stein-rock were employed by Rolls-Royce. The remaining authors declare that the re-search was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. 

# 13 Declaration of Generative AI 

During the preparation of this work, the authors used OpenAI’s ChatGPT in order to assist with crafting the formal notation of the presented methodologies and their underlying concepts. Furthermore, the tool was used to enhance coding, copy editing, and literature research. After using this tool/service, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the published article. 

# References 

[1] N.-H. Kim, D. An, and J.-H. Choi, Prognostics and Health Management of Engineering Systems: An Introduction . Cham: Springer, 2017. [2] A. J. Volponi, “Gas turbine engine health management: Past, present, and future trends,” Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power , vol. 136, no. 5, p. 051201, 2014. [Online]. Available: https://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article/136/5/ 051201/373592/Gas-Turbine-Engine-Health-Management-Past-Present [3] A. D. Fentaye, A. T. Baheta, S. I. Gilani, and K. G. Kyprianidis, “A review on gas turbine gas-path diagnostics: State-of-the-art methods, challenges and opportunities,” Aerospace , vol. 6, no. 7, p. 83, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2226-4310/6/7/83 [4] M. Tahan, E. Tsoutsanis, M. Muhammad, and Z. A. Abdul Karim, “Performance-based health monitoring, diagnostics and prognostics for condition-based maintenance of gas turbines: A review,” Applied Energy , vol. 198, pp. 122–144, 2017. [Online]. Available: https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.04.048 35 [5] D. L. Doel, “An assessment of weighted-least-squares-based gas path analysis,” Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power ,vol. 116, no. 2, pp. 366–373, 1994. [Online]. Available: https: //asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article/116/2/366/40 8351/An-Assessment-of-Weighted-Least-Squares-Based-Gas [6] D. Simon, “A comparison of filtering approaches for aircraft engine health estimation,” Aerospace Science and Technology , vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 276–284, 2008. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ast.2007.06.002 [7] MathWorks, “Three ways to estimate remaining useful life: Predictive maintenance with MATLAB,” Ebook, The MathWorks, Inc., 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.mathworks.com/content/dam/mathwo rks/ebook/estimating-remaining-useful-life-ebook.pdf [8] M. Ulusoy, “Introduction (predictive maintenance, part 1),” Online video, MathWorks, dec 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.mathworks.com/ videos/predictive-maintenance-part-1-introduction-1545827554336.html [9] MathWorks, “What is predictive maintenance?” MathWorks Discovery article, 2025, accessed: 2025-12-30. [Online]. Available: https: //www.mathworks.com/discovery/predictive-maintenance.html [10] ——, “Rul estimation using rul estimator models,” MATLAB Predictive Maintenance Toolbox documentation, 2025, accessed: 2025-12-30. [Online]. Available: https://www.mathworks.com/help/predmaint/ug/rul-estimat ion-using-rul-estimator-models.html [11] ——, “Overcoming four common obstacles to predictive maintenance with MATLAB and Simulink,” White paper, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.mathworks.com/content/dam/mathworks/white-paper/gat ed/predictive-maintenance-challenges-whitepaper.pdf [12] I. Yilmaz, “Evaluation of the relationship between exhaust gas temperature and operational parameters in cfm56-7b engines,” Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part G: Journal of Aerospace Engineering , vol. 223, no. 4, pp. 433–440, 2009. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1243/09544100JAERO474 [13] D. L. Doel, “Temper—a gas-path analysis tool for commercial jet engines,” Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power ,vol. 116, no. 1, pp. 82–89, 1994. [Online]. Available: https: //asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article/116/1/82/407 947/TEMPER-A-Gas-Path-Analysis-Tool-for-Commercial-Jet [14] Z. Wang and Y. Zhao, “Data-driven exhaust gas temperature baseline predictions for aeroengine based on machine learning algorithms,” 

Aerospace , vol. 10, no. 1, p. 17, 2023. [Online]. Available: https: //www.mdpi.com/2226-4310/10/1/17 36 [15] A. Heng, S. Zhang, A. C. P. Tan, and J. Mathew, “Rotating machinery prognostics: State of the art, challenges and opportunities,” Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing , vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 724–739, 2009. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S088832700 8001968 [16] X.-S. Si, W. Wang, C.-H. Hu, and D.-H. Zhou, “Remaining useful life estimation – a review on the statistical data driven approaches,” IEEE Trans. Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C, vol. 213, no. 1, pp. 1248–1263, 2011. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0377221710007903 [17] A. Khosravi, S. Nahavandi, D. Creighton, and A. A. Karr, “Comprehensive Review of Neural Network-Based Prediction Intervals and New Advances,” 

IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks , vol. 22, no. 9, pp. 1341–1356, 2011. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5995614 [18] M. Abdar et al. , “A review of uncertainty quantification in deep learning: Techniques, applications and challenges,” Information Fusion , vol. 76, pp. 243–297, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/scienc e/article/pii/S1566253521001081 [19] S. Sankararaman, “Significance, interpretation, and quantification of uncertainty in prognostics and remaining useful life prediction,” 

Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing , vol. 52–53, pp. 228–247, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0 888327014002052 [20] A. Kendall, Y. Gal, and R. Cipolla, “Multi-task learning using uncertainty to weigh losses for scene geometry and semantics,” in Proc. CVPR , 2018, pp. 7482–7491. [21] Y. Ovadia, E. Fertig, J. Ren, Z. Nado, D. Sculley, S. Nowozin, J. Dillon, B. Lakshminarayanan, and J. Snoek, “Can you trust your model’s uncertainty? evaluating predictive uncertainty under dataset shift,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 32, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/hash/855 8cb408c1d76621371888657d2eb1d-Abstract.html [22] T. Gneiting and A. E. Raftery, “Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction, and estimation,” Journal of the American Statistical Association , vol. 102, no. 477, pp. 359–378, 2007. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1198/016214506000001437 [23] A. N. Angelopoulos and S. Bates, “A gentle introduction to conformal prediction and distribution-free uncertainty quantification,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.07511 37 [24] A. Saxena and K. Goebel, “Turbofan Engine Degradation Simulation Data Set (C-MAPSS),” NASA Ames Prognostics Data Repository, Moffett Field, CA, USA, Tech. Rep., 2008. [25] S. B. Giduthuri, P. Zhao, and X. Li, “Deep convolutional neural network based regression approach for estimation of remaining useful life,” in 

International Conference on Database Systems for Advanced Applications (DASFAA) . Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2016, pp. 214–228. [Online]. Available: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319 -32025-0 14 [26] X. Li, Q. Ding, and J.-Q. Sun, “Remaining useful life estimation in prognostics using deep convolution neural networks,” Reliability Engineering & System Safety , vol. 172, pp. 1–11, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2017.11.021 [27] N. DeVol, C. Saldana, and K. Fu, “Inception-based deep convolutional neural network for remaining useful life estimation of turbofan engines,” in Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the PHM Society , vol. 13, no. 1, 2021. [Online]. Available: http://papers.phmsociety.org/index.php/ phmconf/article/view/3109 [28] D. Solis-Martin, J. Gal´ an-P´ aez, and J. Borrego-Diaz, “A stacked deep convolutional neural network to predict the remaining useful life of a turbofan engine,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2111.1 2689 [29] C. W. Hong, C. Lee, K. Lee, M. S. Ko, D. E. Kim, and K. Hur, “Remaining useful life prognosis for turbofan engine using explainable deep neural networks with dimensionality reduction,” Sensors , vol. 20, no. 22, p. 6626, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/20/22/6626 [30] C. Peng, Y. Chen, Q. Chen, Z. Tang, L. Li, and W. Gui, “A remaining useful life prognosis of turbofan engine using temporal and spatial feature fusion,” Sensors , vol. 21, no. 2, p. 418, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/21/2/418 [31] H. Li, Z. Wang, and Z. Li, “An enhanced CNN-LSTM remaining useful life prediction model for aircraft engine with attention mechanism,” 

PeerJ Computer Science , vol. 8, p. e1084, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://peerj.com/articles/cs-1084.pdf [32] P. R. d. O. da Costa, A. Akcay, Y. Zhang, and U. Kaymak, “Attention and long short-term memory network for remaining useful lifetime predictions of turbofan engine degradation,” International Journal of Prognostics and Health Management , vol. 10, p. 034, 2019, alternate URL: https://pure.tue.nl/ws/portalfiles/portal/146883988/ijphm 19 034.pdf. [Online]. Available: https://papers.phmsociety.org/index.php/ijphm/arti cle/view/2623 38 [33] H. Tian, L. Yang, and B. Ju, “Spatial correlation and temporal attention-based LSTM for remaining useful life prediction of turbofan engine,” Measurement , vol. 214, p. 112816, 2023. [Online]. Available: https: //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0263224123003809 [34] Y. Qin, N. Cai, C. Gao, Y. Zhang, Y. Cheng, and X. Chen, “Remaining useful life prediction using temporal deep degradation network for complex machinery with attention-based feature extraction,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.10916 [35] F. Wang, A. Liu, C. Qu, R. Xiong, and L. Chen, “A deep-learning method for remaining useful life prediction of power machinery via dual-attention mechanism,” Sensors , vol. 25, no. 2, p. 497, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/25/2/497 [36] X. Liu, L. Xiong, Y. Zhang, and C. Luo, “Remaining useful life prediction for turbofan engine using SAE-TCN model,” Aerospace , vol. 10, no. 8, p. 715, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2226-4310/10/8/7 15 [37] Z. Fan, W. Li, and K.-C. Chang, “A two-stage attention-based hierarchical transformer for turbofan engine remaining useful life prediction,” Sensors , vol. 24, no. 3, p. 824, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/24/3/824 [38] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , vol. 30, 2017, pp. 5998–6008. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762 [39] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition,” in Proc. CVPR , 2016, pp. 770–778. [40] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural Computation , vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997. [41] M. Schuster and K. K. Paliwal, “Bidirectional recurrent neural networks,” 

IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing , vol. 45, no. 11, pp. 2673–2681, 1997. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/78.650093 [42] D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2015. [43] D. A. Nix and A. S. Weigend, “Estimating the mean and variance of the target probability distribution,” in Proceedings of 1994 ieee international conference on neural networks (ICNN’94) , vol. 1. IEEE, 1994, pp. 55–60. 39 [44] N. Z. Gebraeel, H. Elwany, and M. A. Lawley, “Residual-life distributions from component degradation signals: A bayesian approach,” IIE Transac-tions , vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 543–557, 2005. [45] W. Weibull, “A statistical distribution function of wide applicability,” Jour-nal of Applied Mechanics , vol. 18, pp. 293–297, 1951. [46] W. Q. Meeker and L. A. Escobar, Statistical Methods for Reliability Data .New York: Wiley, 1998. [47] S. Arik, T. Huang, W. K. Lai, and Q. Liu, Eds., Neural Information Pro-cessing: 22nd International Conference, ICONIP 2015, Istanbul, Turkey, November 9–12, 2015, Proceedings Part III , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 9491. Cham: Springer, 2015. [48] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “SGDR: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.03983 , 2016. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=Skq89Scxx [49] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Pas-sos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay, “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python,” Journal of Machine Learning Re-search , vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011. [50] L. Buitinck, G. Louppe, M. Blondel, F. Pedregosa, A. Mueller, O. Grisel, V. Niculae, P. Prettenhofer, A. Gramfort, J. Grobler, R. Layton, J. Vander-Plas, A. Joly, B. Holt, and G. Varoquaux, “API design for machine learn-ing software: experiences from the scikit-learn project,” in ECML PKDD Workshop: Languages for Data Mining and Machine Learning , 2013, pp. 108–122. [51] R. E. Kalman, “A new approach to linear filtering and prediction prob-lems,” Transactions of the ASME–Journal of Basic Engineering , vol. 82, no. Series D, pp. 35–45, 1960. [52] T. Lacey, “Tutorial: The kalman filter,” Georgia Institute of Technology ,vol. 139, 1998. [53] J. Perea and J. Harer, “Sliding windows and persistence: An application of topological methods to signal analysis,” 2013. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1307.6188 [54] W. A. Shewhart, Economic Control of Quality of Manufactured Product .New York: D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc., 1923. [Online]. Available: https://search.worldcat.org/title/1045408 [55] W. A. Shewhart and W. E. Deming, Statistical Method from the Viewpoint of Quality Control . Washington, DC: The Graduate School, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1939. [Online]. Available: https://search.worldcat.org/title/1249225 40 [56] D. C. Montgomery, Introduction to Statistical Quality Control , 5th ed. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, 2005. [Online]. Available: https://search.worldcat.org/title/56729567 [57] National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), “Median absolute deviation,” 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.itl.nist.gov/div898/so ftware/dataplot/refman2/auxillar/mad.htm [58] ——, “6.3.1. what are control charts? Engineering Statistics Handbook ,chapter 6: Process or product monitoring and control, subchapter 6.3,” n.d. [Online]. Available: https://www.itl.nist.gov/div898/handbook/pmc /section3/pmc31.htm [59] Western Electric Company, Statistical Quality Control Handbook , 1st ed. Indianapolis, Indiana: Western Electric Co., 1956. [Online]. Available: https://search.worldcat.org/title/33858387 [60] QI Macros, “What are the nelson rules for control charts?” n.d. [Online]. Available: https://www.qimacros.com/control-chart/nelson-rules/ [61] Y. Gal and Z. Ghahramani, “Dropout as a Bayesian approximation: Rep-resenting model uncertainty in deep learning,” in Proc. International Con-ference on Machine Learning (ICML) . PMLR, 2016, pp. 1050–1059. [62] B. Efron, “Bootstrap methods: Another look at the jackknife,” The Annals of Statistics , vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 569–593, 1979. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1214/aos/1176344552 [63] B. Lakshminarayanan, A. Pritzel, and C. Blundell, “Simple and scalable predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 (NIPS 2017) , 2017, pp. 6402– 6413. [64] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A survey,” 

ACM Computing Surveys , vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 15:1–15:58, 2009. [65] D. Hendrycks and K. Gimpel, “A baseline for detecting misclassified and out-of-distribution examples in neural networks,” in International Confer-ence on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2017. 41