Title: A Multi-Stage Warm-Start Deep Learning Framework for Unit Commitment

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.21891v1

Published Time: Fri, 24 Apr 2026 01:15:47 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# A Multi-Stage Warm-Start Deep Learning Framework for Unit Commitment 

Muhy Eddin Za’ter, Anna Van Boven, Bri-Mathias Hodge and Kyri Baker 

University of Colorado Boulder 

Boulder, CO, USA 

{muhy.zater, anna.vanboven, brimathias.hodge, kyri }@colorado.edu 

Abstract —Maintaining instantaneous balance between elec-tricity supply and demand is critical for reliability and grid instability. System operators achieve this through solving the task of Unit Commitment (UC),ca high dimensional large-scale Mixed-integer Linear Programming (MILP) problem that is strictly and heavily governed by the grid physical constraints. As grid integrate variable renewable sources, and new technologies such as long duration storage in the grid, UC must be optimally solved for multi-day horizons and potentially with greater frequency. Therefore, traditional MILP solvers increasingly struggle to compute solutions within these tightening operational time limits. To bypass these computational bottlenecks, this paper proposes a novel framework utilizing a transformer-based architecture to predict generator commitment schedules over a 72-hour horizon. Also, because raw predictions in highly dimensional spaces often yield physically infeasible results, the pipeline integrates the self-attention network with deterministic post-processing heuristics that systematically enforce minimum up/down times and minimize excess capacity. Finally, these refined predictions are utilized as a warm start for a downstream MILP solver, while employing a confidence-based variable fixation strategy to drastically reduce the combinatorial search space. Validated on a single-bus test system, the complete multi-stage pipeline achieves 100% feasibility and significantly accelerates computation times. Notably, in approximately 20% of test instances, the proposed model reached a feasible operational schedule with a lower overall system cost than relying solely on the solver. 

Index Terms —Unit commitment, learn to optimize, Deep Learning. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Maintaining instantaneous balance between electricity sup-ply and demand is critical to prevent grid instability and cascading blackouts [1]. Independent System Operators (ISOs) achieve this by continuously clearing wholesale electricity markets through Unit Commitment (UC) [2], an optimization challenge that determines the optimal binary startup and shutdown sequences of generators over a scheduled time horizon. Because operational decisions are temporally coupled and governed by strict physical constraints, UC is formulated as a large-scale Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) problem [3]. The computational complexity of UC scales exponentially with the number of generators, making it an NP-hard problem [4]. This bottleneck is further exacerbated by grid decarboniza-tion goals. This transition toward variable and uncertain elec-tricity sources such as solar and wind introduces complex stochastic variables and requires more restrictive models to compensate for the decreasing rotational inertia of the grid [5]. Consequently, traditional MILP solvers increasingly struggle to compute solutions within the strict operational time limits required by ISOs [6]. Furthermore, as grid planning evolves to evaluate the impact of long-duration energy storage and multi-day weather events, operators must increasingly expand the UC horizon from the standard 24-hour day-ahead markets to longer periods [7]. All of the above-mentioned aspects necessitate research efforts toward alternative solutions toward faster UC. Because UC is solved repeatedly with identi-cal structural topologies but varying exogenous data inputs, Machine Learning (ML) has emerged as a potential new transformative paradigm to bypass these computational limits. While ML offers significant speedups by predicting gener-ator on/off statuses, thereby transforming the computationally expensive MILP into a faster Linear Program (LP), minor statistical errors in this highly dimensional space easily yield physically infeasible results [8], [9]. To bridge this gap, the literature proposes various methods [10], including entirely bypassing the MIP solver via specific architectures [11]– [13], or reducing MILP dimensionality by predicting statuses only for generators with high prediction confidence [14], utilizing predictions as solver warm-starts [15], or introducing deterministic post-processing heuristics to restore feasibility [6]. However, a critical limitation remains: traditional neural architectures struggle to process extremely high-dimensional state spaces while effectively capturing complex temporal couplings, such as multi-hour ramping constraints and min-imum up/down times [16]. This shortfall is highly evident when expanding to longer horizons, potentially leading to sub-optimality, infeasibility, and reduced computational gains. To address these limitations, we propose a novel framework that employs a transformer-based architecture to natively learn deep temporal dependencies over a multi-day ahead horizon, and utilizes the most effective ML-based strategies from the recent literature [8], [9], [16]. By synergizing our self-attention base sequence-modeling network [17] with post-processing heuristics, predictive warm-start, and targeted variable fixation, our pipeline bridges the gap between raw statistical predictions and the strict physical constraints of the UC problem over a long horizon. The contributions of this paper are as follows:  

> •

Self-Attention for Temporal Coupling: We introduce an architecture that leverages multi-head self-attention to 

> arXiv:2604.21891v1 [eess.SY] 23 Apr 2026

explicitly model the long-range temporal dependencies and high-dimensional interactions of the grid over amulti-day-ahead horizon. We also utilize zero-initialized learnable positional embeddings, where the model inher-ently captures the periodic structure of daily load and renewable generation curves.  

> •

Multi-Stage Feasibility Pipeline: We detail three de-terministic post-processing algorithms that systematically enforce minimum up/down time constraints, minimize excess online capacity via localized economic dispatch, and optimize generator utilization.  

> •

Confidence-based Search Space Reduction: We im-plement a targeted variable fixation strategy that sets generator statuses falling above or below specific predic-tive confidence thresholds when the models predictions are passed as warm starts. This approach reduces the combinatorial dimensionality of the downstream MILP solver, accelerating computation times by leaving only the most marginal decisions to for the solver.  

> •

We open source the data, data generation pipeline and the source code of the proposed method in this repository 1.II. M ETHODOLOGY 

As discussed above, machine learning has the potential to drastically speed up obtaining solutions to large optimization problems, where computation time is currently a bottleneck. However, these ML predictions often cannot be relied on in-dependently unless they can provide feasibility and optimality guarantees. In this section, we introduce the baseline unit commitment problem we seek to solve (II-A), then discuss the model used to predict generator statuses (II-B) and the data generated to train the model (III-A1). The post-processing steps used to improve the model prediction are then described in subsections II-C and II-D. Figure 1 shows the overall pipeline of the proposed method. 

A. Unit Commitment for a Single-Bus Test System 

This paper presents a model submitted to EPRI’s ‘AI-ccelerating Unit Commitment’ competition, a four-month competition organized to foster research in ML-enhanced algo-rithm development for solving the unit commitment problem [18]. The model presented here finished fourth out of over 2,300 submissions from a total of 123 teams participating. The model was tasked with predicting generator on-off statuses for a single-bus test system comprised of 51 thermal units, 15 hydro plants, 13 batteries and 1 pumped hydro storage. The system also has 1 source each of aggregated solar power, aggregated wind power, and aggregated system load (perfect forecasting is assumed for each of these sources). The competition’s objective is to determine the generator statuses for each generator over a 72-hour period that minimizes the system cost. The predictions need to be feasible; there must be sufficient generation to meet demand, and each generator must not violate start-up/shut-down or ramp-up/down constraints. All 51 generators are commitable generators. 

> 1https://github.com/CUgriffinlab/AI4UnitCommitment

B. Model 

We propose a transformer-based neural network designed to predict generator commitment schedules for a 72-hour planning horizon, given the load, solar, and wind profiles. The model outputs binary commitment decisions for all Ng thermal generators simultaneously, which are subsequently refined by a feasibility post-processing heuristic before being passed to an economic dispatch LP solver. The architecture of the model is visualized in Fig. 2. 

1) Problem Formulation: Let P ∈ RB×T ×F denote a batch of B input profiles over T = 72 hourly time steps, where each step contains F = 3 features: normalized system de-mand, solar generation, and wind generation. The raw profiles are normalized using training-set statistics ( μ, σ) to stabilize gradient flow across inputs with different physical scales: 

ˆpt = pt − μσ + ϵ , ϵ = 10 −6 (1) The model produces a logit tensor Z ∈ RB×Ng ×T , from which binary commitment decisions are recovered via a sigmoid function and a threshold τ tuned on validation instances: 

ui,t = 1[σ(zi,t ) > τ ] , i = 1 , . . . , N g , t = 1 , . . . , T (2) 

2) Input Encoding: The input sequence ˆP is first projected into the model’s latent dimension dmodel via a learned linear embedding. To inject temporal position information, a fully learnable positional embedding Φ ∈ R1×T ×dmodel is added element-wise: 

H(0) =

 ˆP W e + be



+ Φ, Φ ∼ N (0 , 0) (3) Unlike standard sinusoidal embeddings, initializing Φ to zero allows the model to learn the specific daily periodic structure of grid load and renewable curves entirely from scratch without imposing rigid priors. 

3) Transformer Encoder: The encoded sequence H(0) is pro-cessed by L = 8 stacked Transformer encoder layers [17]. Instead of standard post-normalization, each layer applies Pre-Layer Nor-malization (Pre-LN) [19] to prevent vanishing gradients during early training. Within each layer, a Multi-Head Self-Attention (MHSA) module explicitly models the temporal coupling across the 72-hour window. For a power systems context, this mechanism dynamically evaluates how the state of the grid at one specific hour (the Query) is constrained by conditions at all other hours (the Keys), allowing the network to natively learn complex inter-hour constraints like prolonged ramping trajectories. The attention operation for each head 

j is defined as: Attention (Qj , Kj , Vj ) = softmax Qj K⊤

> j

√dk

!

Vj (4) MHSA (H) = [ head 1 ∥ · · · ∥ head h] WO (5) where Qj , Kj , Vj are linear projections of the layer input into a reduced dimension dk = dmodel /h , using h = 64 parallel heads. The MHSA output is then added via a residual connection: 

˜H(ℓ) = H(ℓ−1) + MHSA 



LN 



H(ℓ−1)  

(6) Finally, the sequence is refined by a standard position-wise Feed-Forward Network (FFFN) with dropout ( p = 0 .05 ) for regularization. Fig. 1: The 3 stages of the proposed pipeline. Stage 1 is the deep learning model. Stage 2 is the post-processing heuristics to restore feasibility. Stage 3 is the warm-started MILP solver. 

Fig. 2: The components of the proposed architecture. The latent component is used to process the input with positional encoding. The deep encoder consists of self-attention to map the input to the output. Finally, the classification head is responsible for generating the final predictions. 

4) Commitment Classifier: To map the abstract temporal repre-sentations back to discrete physical unit decisions, the final encoder output H(L) is passed through a two-layer generator classification head (inner dimension 1024 , ReLU activation). This classification head projects the latent sequence into the non-normalized com-mitment logits for all Ng thermal generators simultaneously. The resulting tensor is transposed to yield the standard UC format 

Z ∈ RB×Ng ×T , ensuring the downstream post-processing pipeline receives a cohesive 72-hour schedule for every unit. 

5) Training Objective: Let Y ∈ { 0, 1}B×Ng ×T denote the ground-truth MILP commitment schedule. The model is trained with a class-weighted binary cross-entropy (BCE) loss [20]. In grid operations, failing to commit a necessary generator (under-commitment) causes physical violations and infeasibility, whereas turning on an extra generator (over-commitment) merely incurs an economic penalty. Therefore, we introduce a positive-class weight 

α = 1 .5 to explicitly penalize under-commitment errors: 

L = − 1

B · Ng · T

X

> b,i,t

h

α · yb,i,t log σ(zb,i,t )+ (1 − yb,i,t ) log(1 − σ(zb,i,t )) 

i (7) The network is optimized using AdamW [21] with weight decay (λ = 10 −4) and a One-Cycle learning rate schedule [22]. Implementation details and code are available on this repository 2.

C. Refinements 

The model initially predicts a value from 0 to 1 for each generator at each hour indicating the probability the generator is on at time 

T . The model uses a threshold of 0.5 to map predictions to either 0 (off) or 1 (on). This subsection details the three post-processing steps that are used to manually adjust the model’s initial prediction. The remainder of this subsection will use the following notation. Let 

gi ∈ G, 1 ≤ i ≤ 51 be the set of thermal generators. Each generator 

> 2https://github.com/CUgriffinlab/AI4UnitCommitment

has a cost term ci, a minimum up ( mu i) and minimum down ( md i)time, a ramp up ( ru i) and ramp down ( rd i) limit, and a minimum and maximum generation ( pi, p i). For each timestep t, 1 ≤ t ≤ 72 ,define the on/off status of generator i as sti ∈ { 0, 1}. Additionally, define Bi = {(t0, t 1)|s(t0−1)  

> i

= 0 , s (t1+1)  

> i

= 0 , and sji = 1 , t 0 ≤

j ≤ t1} as the set of ’on-blocks’ for each generator and Di (defined similarly) be the set of a generator’s ‘off-blocks‘. There are a few system-level variables, as well: the system-level net load (demand - solar - wind) is Lt, and the required ramping between hours is 

Rt = Lt − Lt−1. Finally, the generation capacity is calculated as 

Pt = P 

> gi∈G

sti ∗ pi and ramping capacity as Dt = P 

> gi∈G

sti ∗ ri.

1) Surgical repair: This step ensures that the generator con-straints (minimum up and down time) are met and that sufficient generation is online at all times. First, the algorithm iterates through each generator’s on-blocks and off-blocks, setting sti = 1 until the minimum up time is met and sti = 0 until minimum down time is met. Then, the algorithm iterates through each timestep and turns on the cheapest generators until Lt ≤ Pt − μ and Rt ≤ Dt − μ for some threshold value μ.

2) Economic generator repairs: This step seeks to reduce the amount of excess online generation at each time step. Taking advantage of the fact that the economic dispatch LP for fixed generator statuses is computationally cheap, the algorithm iterates through each timestep and turns off the most expensive generators until Lt ≥ Pt + ϵ for some threshold value ϵ, ensuring that no generator min-up constraints are violated in the process. It then quickly solves the economic dispatch LP to verify that the system is feasible. The threshold values μ and ϵ represent the generation met by the battery. 

3) Head/tail trim : As a result of the baseline prediction and the previous steps, generators are often turned on earlier than needed or kept on too long. To accommodate this, algorithm 1 trims the head and tail of the generator blocks where possible. Taking the result of the economic dispatch run in step 2 (which gives generator dispatches 

pti ), this algorithm iterates through the on-blocks of each generator and calculates its percentage utilization ut0:t1 

> i

for the first and last few hours of each on-block. If the utilization is less than a threshold, the generator is turned off for the first and last few hours of each block. 

Algorithm 1 Generation Head/Tail Trim                                             

> 1: for gi∈Gdo
> 2: for (t0, t 1)∈Bido
> 3: u0
> i= ( Pt0+3
> t=t0sti∗(pti−pi)) /(pi−pi)
> 4: u1
> i= ( Pt1
> t=t1−3sti∗(pti−pi)) /(pi−pi)
> 5: if u0
> i< T then
> 6: st0:t0+3
> i= 0
> 7: end if
> 8: if u1
> i< T then
> 9: st1−3: t1
> i= 0
> 10: end if
> 11: end for
> 12: end for

The utility of these post-processing steps is demonstrated in Figure 3, which compares the predicted generator status before and after the refinements. Even though the baseline prediction in this instance predicts the ground-truth statuses with 98.7% accuracy, it is still infeasible since it violates the generator minimum-up and minimum-down constraints. The post-processing steps restore feasibility to the sample, and result in a better prediction than relying solely on the solver with 0.25% MIP gap solution, even without warm-starting and the warm-started solver uses the same MIP gap value. 

D. Warm-Start with Prediction Thresholds 

Solving an MIP is computationally expensive because the dis-joint shape of the problem’s drives the feasible region to be non-differentiable Warm-starting the binary decision variables can there-fore significantly reduce the computation time by informing the solver where to look. Using the generator status predictions as a warm start will improve both feasibility and provide a solution at or below the optimality gap [15]. The computation time of the warm-started MIP can be further decreased by reducing the number of decision variables. Similar to how [14] predicts the generator statuses for only the most-trusted generators, we fix a generator prediction for any variable that the ML model predicted with a sufficiently high threshold value, thereby reducing the MIP problem size. This technique is referred to as 

threshold in the results section. 

III. I MPLEMENTATION & R ESULTS 

This section presents the implementation details, conducted exper-iments and their results. 

A. Implementation 1) Data generation: The competition provided a dataset of 

2620 instances. In addition to generator-specific characteristics that remained constant across all samples, each instance consisted of hourly load, solar, and wind forecasts over 72 hours and the resulting hourly generator status for the 51 thermal generators. The MIP was solved using Gurobi with a MIP gap of 0.25% to match the competitions dataset MIP gap and to accelerate the generation of training samples. To increase the size and scope of the dataset, we utilized the provided instances to generate additional data by perturbing the solar, wind and load values. We applied simple perturbations on the profiles to include a diverse set of potential operational conditions such as zero net load and 100% renewable generation of the load. This step created more samples for the ML model training, and improved the model performance on challenging scenarios. The final dataset consisted of over 420,000 diverse samples. The initial competition-provided dataset is used to validate the models in this paper. 

2) Model and Computation: Deep learning models, data gen-eration pipelines, and post-processing heuristics were implemented in Python 3.12. The neural networks were built and trained using the PyTorch framework. Model training was executed on a computing cluster utilizing two NVIDIA A100 GPUs. To accelerate training, we distributed the workload using PyTorch Distributed Data Parallel (DDP) with the NCCL backend, employing a batch size of B = 1024 

and gradient clipping of γ = 1 .0.For inference and downstream optimization, the pipeline was executed locally on an Apple M4 machine equipped with 16 GB of unified memory. The MILP formulations were modeled using Scipy package and optimized using HiGHS solver via its Python APIs. Finally, the binary decision threshold τ was empirically tuned during this inference phase. 

B. Validation 1) Proposed Pipeline Validation: The model (and variations) introduced in this paper were validated using 500 samples provided by the competition [18]. The evaluated models were compared against a baseline approach that used the HiGHS solver independently. Performance was measured using three key metrics: Time Ratio (T.R.), calculated by dividing the model’s solve time by the HiGHS solve time; Optimality Ratio (O.R.), defined as the operational cost achieved by the model divided by the cost obtained from the HiGHS solver (reported in quartiles); and finally, Feasibility, which represents the percentage of test set instances that yielded physically feasible solutions. We present here the results of the ML model. We explored all possible variations of the pipeline, with regard of enabling or disabling the stages mentioned in Section II. In the iterations that use warm-starting, the MIP was solved using HiGHS solver with a MIP gap of 0.25% , both with and without the fixed-variable threshold. Fig. 3: Predicted generator statuses on a sample data point where the model prediction obtained a lower cost than the ground truth. Grey values indicate the generator was turned off by the post-processing, while light blue indicates the generator was turned on by post-processing. 

The output of these models were then fed into an LP solver to obtain the dispath of each generators. The configruration and the performance for each model iteration are presented in Table I, with the highest performing models bolded. Models were scored based on the ratio between the LP cost from the predicted generator status and the ground truth LP cost over all 

500 samples. We also analyze the computation time ratio between the ML model and the full MILP computation solve time. The six model iterations are labeled M 1 − M 6, and are referenced as such throughout the remainder of this section.                                                       

> label P.P W.S Th. label P.P W.S Th.
> M1 M2 ✓
> M3 ✓M4 ✓✓
> M5 ✓✓M6 ✓✓✓
> label T.R (%) O.R (25) O.R (50) O.R (75) % Feas.
> M1 0.03 1.0019 1.004 1.0069 31.6 M2 .16 1.0012 1.0025 1.0041 100 M3 5.80 1.0008 1.002 1.0035 77.6 M4 1.56 1.0000 1.0008 1.0018 98.6 M5 5.34 1.0008 1.002 1.0037 100
> M6 1.46 1.0000 1.0007 1.0018 100

TABLE I: Various model iterations for each solver. P.P = post-processing, W.S = warm-start, Th. = threshold, T.R = time ratio, 

O.R = optimality ratio. 

As shown in Table I. It is worth mentioning that while M1 model (baseline transformer) obtained a 98% accuracy when evaluated as commitment status, the predictions resulted in a median LP cost increase of 0.4% with only 31.6% feasible samples, which highlights the need for post-processing steps. The heuristic-based post processing (M2) significantly increased the feasibility ratio to 100%, with enhanced optimality ratio compared to M1. M3 and M4 variants were the heuristic-based post processing was disabled, but the deep learning prediction were fed as warm start to the MIP solver (with fixed variables in M4). The cost ratio quartiles were enhanced, but with reduced feasibility ratios. Variant M5, which had the post-processing and warm start for a solver retained 100% feasibility but with higher optimality ratio. Finally, variant M6 were all the stages of the pipeline were enabled, achieved the best overall feasibility ratio and optimality ratio. It is evident from the table that using the deep learning predictions as warm start for a solver enhances the cost ratio, on the cost of speed, but fixing the variables with respect to a threshold helps in speeding up the process. 

Fig. 4: Distribution of optimality ratios for models M1 - M6, capped at 1.01. Only feasible samples are considered. 

Figure 4 shows the distribution of optimality ratios over all models, considering only the samples that had feasible predictions with all models. The M1 model has the lowest slope, with a maximum optimality ratio of 2.2. Implementing either the post-processing steps or the warm-start (M2- M4) increases the slope slightly, while models M5 and M6 have the lowest scoring optimality ratios. One of the most notable results from this paper is that around 20% of all samples predicted with the M6 model have an optimality ratio below 1. This indicates that the M6 model predicted a solution better than the Highs solver, even though both were solved with a MIP gap of 0.25%. Finally, we compare the impacts of each individual refinement stage. Figure 5 shows the calculated main effects on feasibility, optimality, and computation time for the post-processing steps, warm-starting the algorithm, and warm-starting with a threshold. All factors independently decrease in the optimality ratio, although warm-starting has a more significant impact than including the post-processing heuristics (indicated by a steeper slope). Similarly, all factors independently increase the feasibility, but warm-starting the solver only increases the feasibility to 98.8%, while including the post-processing steps creates feasibility for all samples. Finally, warm-starting the algorithm significantly increases the computation time, but this impact is mitigated with fixed-variable thresholding. 

Fig. 5: Main effects (scaled from 0 to 1) for optimality ratio and feasibility. 

2) Comparison against Other Methods: To analyze the effect of the baseline transformer architecture on the overall predictions, a neural network (NN) (used in [6] and Long-short-term-memory network (LSTM) (used in [23] was trained on the same data, then augmented with all three heuristic steps. The results of these models are displayed in Table II. The transformer M6 model generated the predictions with the lowest cost ratio, but took longer on average to run; the LSTM and the NN have a computation time ratio similar to the M1 and M2 model, even though they are warm-started. This suggests that while the smaller models do provide better computational speed-ups, the transformer provides a better initial prediction that leads to a more optimal solution when paired with the post-processing and warm-starting. 

Model T.R (%) O.R. (25) O.R. (50) O.R. (75) % Feas. 

M6 1.46 1.0000 1.0007 1.0018 100 NN 0.05 1.0036 1.0057 1.0089 100 LSTM 0.39 1.0019 1.0039 1.0065 99.6 

TABLE II: Comparison of ML model baseline. 

It is worth mentioning that the proposed transformer model is slower than other ML models. Because transformer models are inherently bigger and slower than LSTM and NN architectures. However, The significant difference in speed is due to the fact that the transformer architecture inference is only GPU-optimized, and these numbers are reported on Apple M4 chip, which gives LSTM and NN speed advantages. 

IV. C ONCLUSION 

This paper presents a machine learning based pipeline for 3 day-ahead hourly unit commitment. The proposed methods consists of three stages; the first stage is a self-attention model, followed by a post-processing heuristics step, which outputs are fed as a warm start for a UC MILP solver. The proposed method was validated on a single bus system that represents the Irish system, and compared against other machine learning methods. The results of the experi-ments clearly demonstrated the significant computation speed gained from using machine learning methods as a warm-start for UC solvers. There are a few notable limitations to this paper that should be acknowledged. As mentioned, the demand, wind, and solar are assumed to be perfect forecasts. Including forecast uncertainty would require adjustments to guarantee feasibility. Furthermore, this work is based on a copper-plate model and does not include transmission constraints, so conclusions cannot be drawn as to how successful this proposed pipeline would be on a more complex network. Future work should apply this framework to various larger power systems networks and incorporate more accurate data and constraints. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

We would like to thank EPRI for organizing and hosting the ‘AI-ccelerating Unit Commitment’ competition, as well as providing the dataset and problem formulation that this work was founded on [18]. 

REFERENCES [1] L. L. Grigsby, Power system stability and control . CRC press, 2007. [2] G. B. e. a. Giannakis, “Monitoring and optimization for power grids: A signal processing perspective,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine ,vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 107–128, 2013. [3] I. Abdou and M. Tkiouat, “Unit commitment problem in electrical power system: A literature review.” International Journal of Electrical & Computer Engineering (2088-8708) , vol. 8, no. 3, 2018. [4] P. e. a. Bendotti, “On the complexity of the unit commitment problem,” 

Annals of Operations Research , vol. 274, no. 1, pp. 119–130, 2019. [5] S. Bahrami, “A neural combinatorial optimization algorithm for unit commitment in ac power systems,” in 2022 IEEE International Con-ference on Communications, Control, and Computing Technologies for Smart Grids (SmartGridComm) . IEEE, 2022, pp. 14–20. [6] A. V. Ramesh and X. Li, “Feasibility layer aided machine learning ap-proach for day-ahead operations,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems ,vol. 39, no. 1, p. 1582–1593, Jan. 2024. [7] A. A. e. a. Thatte, “The role of extended horizon methodology in renewable-dense grids with inter-day long-duration energy storage,” in 

2024 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM) . IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–5. [8] Y. Yang and L. Wu, “Machine learning approaches to the unit commit-ment problem: Current trends, emerging challenges, and new strategies,” 

The Electricity Journal , vol. 34, no. 1, p. 106889, 2021. [9] A. V. Ramesh and X. Li, “Feasibility layer aided machine learning ap-proach for day-ahead operations,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems ,vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 1582–1593, 2023. [10] J. Milla and J. I. P´ erez-D´ ıaz, “The use of artificial intelligence for the unit commitment problem: State of the art,” in ELECTRIMACS 2024 ,E. Belenguer and H. Beltran, Eds. Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, 2025, p. 713–725. [11] J. e. a. Guan, “A gan-based fully model-free learning method for short-term scheduling of large power system,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , vol. 37, no. 4, p. 2655–2665, Jul. 2022. [12] X. e. a. Tang, “Graph convolutional network-based security-constrained unit commitment leveraging power grid topology in learning,” Energy Reports , vol. 9, p. 3544–3552, Dec. 2023. [13] N. e. a. Yang, “Data-driven decision-making for scuc: An improved deep learning approach based on sample coding and seq2seq technique,” 

Protection and Control of Modern Power Systems , vol. 10, no. 2, p. 13–24, Mar. 2025. [14] M. I. A. Shekeew and B. Venkatesh, “Learning-assisted variables reduc-tion method for large-scale milp unit commitment,” IEEE Open Access Journal of Power and Energy , vol. 10, p. 245–258, 2023. [15] C. e. a. O’Malley, “Reinforcement learning and mixed-integer program-ming for power plant scheduling in low carbon systems: Comparison and hybridisation,” Applied Energy , vol. 349, p. 121659, Nov. 2023. [16] H. T. Nguyen and P. L. Donti, “Fsnet: Feasibility-seeking neural network for constrained optimization with guarantees,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.00362 , 2025. [17] A. Vaswani et al. , “Attention is all you need,” in NeurIPS , 2017. [18] Electric Power Research Institute, “Ai-ccelerating unit commitment,” 2025-2026. [19] R. Xiong et al. , “On layer normalization in the transformer architecture,” 2020. [20] Z.-H. Zhou, Machine learning . Springer nature, 2021. [21] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Decoupled weight decay regularization,” 2019. [22] L. N. Smith and N. Topin, “Super-convergence: Very fast training of neural networks using large learning rates,” 2019. [23] A. V. Ramesh and X. Li, “Spatio-temporal deep learning-assisted reduced security-constrained unit commitment,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 4735–4746, 2023.