Title: Robustness of Spatio-temporal Graph Neural Networks for Fault Location in Partially Observable Distribution Grids

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20403v1

Published Time: Thu, 23 Apr 2026 00:46:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# Robustness of Spatio-temporal Graph Neural Networks for Fault Location in Partially Observable Distribution Grids 

# Burak Karabulut 

Ghent University – imec Ghent, Belgium burak.karabulut@ugent.be 

# Carlo Manna 

VITO Mol, Belgium carlo.manna@vito.be 

# Chris Develder 

Ghent University – imec Ghent, Belgium chris.develder@ugent.be 

## Abstract 

Fault location in distribution grids is critical for reliability and minimizing outage durations. Yet, it remains challenging due to partial observability, given sparse measurement infrastructure. Re-cent works show promising results by combining Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) for spatio-temporal learning. Still, many modern GNN architectures remain untested for this grid application, while existing GNN solutions have not explored GNN topology definitions beyond simply adopt-ing the full grid topology to construct the GNN graph. We address these gaps by (i) systematically comparing a newly proposed graph-forming strategy ( measured-only ) to the traditional full-topology ap-proach, and (ii) introducing STGNN (Spatio-temporal GNN) models based on GraphSAGE and an improved Graph Attention (GATv2), for distribution grid fault location; (iii) benchmarking them against state-of-the-art STGNN and RNN baselines on the IEEE 123-bus feeder. In our experiments, all evaluated STGNN variants achieve high performance and consistently outperform a pure RNN baseline, with improvements up to +11 percentage points F1. Among STGNN models, the newly explored RGATv2 and RGSAGE achieve only marginally higher F1 scores. Still, STGNNs demonstrate superior stability, with tight confidence intervals (within ±1.4% ) compared to the RNN baseline (up to ±7.5% ) across different experiment runs. Fi-nally, our proposed reduced GNN topology ( measured-only ) shows clear benefits in both (i) model training time (6-fold reduction) and (ii) model performance (up to +11 points F1). This suggests that 

measured-only graphs offer a more practical, efficient, and robust framework for partially observable distribution grids. 

## Keywords 

Power Systems, fault location, Time Series, Graph Neural Networks, Recurrent Neural Networks 

## 1 Introduction 

Fault location in power distribution networks is essential for main-taining reliability and minimizing outage durations [ 21 ]. By pin-pointing the faulted component — typically resulting from short circuits caused by weather, equipment failures, or insulation break-downs [ 9 , 14 ] — operators can selectively isolate the affected area and restore service more quickly. Given that modern distribution networks are becoming larger, more interconnected, and increas-ingly complex — with the integration of distributed energy resources (DERs) and the electrification of demand (e.g., electric vehicle charg-ing) [ 22 ] — the importance of accurate and timely fault location only continues to grow. Yet, to limit the incurred cost, distribution networks are typically equipped with only a limited number of mea-surement devices [ 32 ], such as micro-phasor measurement units (μPMUs). This infrastructural constraint results in limited observ-ability, and motivates the development of fault location methods that can work effectively with sparse measurement data. Traditional model-based approaches often struggle in these en-vironments due to their reliance on high feeder observability and static assumptions that regarding feeder topology, operating condi-tions and fault characteristics [ 40 ]. While data-driven methods such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) offer better flexibility they often lack topological awareness (i.e., they cannot fully represent the non-uniform elec-trical connectivity between buses) [ 7 ]. To more effectively leverage the topological relations inherent in distribution grids, graph-based learning approaches such as Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [ 13 ], have seen increasing attention for fault location; however, several research gaps remain unaddressed: (i) current GNN approaches typi-cally assume high observability via dense 3-phase sensor placement and have not explored alternate graph representations beyond the 1-to-1 mapping of the GNN graph to the actual feeder bus topology; further (ii) there has not been a rigorous performance comparison of the various recent GNN architectures for fault location; and finally, (iii) most prior works typically rely on relatively small, simplified datasets, leaving a gap in validating GNN performance across the diverse load variations and fault scenarios. Our study addresses these issues, in particular by (1) Proposing and systematically assessing a GNN graph con-struction algorithm (see §5.2) that accounts for partial ob-servability by using only measured buses while reflecting the underlying physical connectivity, and contrasting its performance against the GNN graphs constructed using the full physical topology; (2) Proposing STGNN architectures (see §3.3) that remained unexplored for power system fault location in distribution grids, i.e., the RGSAGE and improved RGAT models; (3) Conducting a systematic quantitative benchmarking study (see § 5.1) against state-of-the-art graph models (RGCN) as well as non-GNN baselines (GRU), using a comprehen-sive dataset of RMS voltage measurements collected via a heterogeneous and sparse placement of 1-, 2-, and 3-phase 

μPMUs. (see §4). Before discussing the setup of our experiments (§4) and their out-comes (§5), next we first present extensive literature review (§2), then introduce our proposed methodology (§3). In this paper’s con-clusion (§6) we will finally discuss next steps to extend the current work towards more advanced fault diagnosis applications. 

> arXiv:2604.20403v1 [cs.LG] 22 Apr 2026 B. Karabulut et al.

## 2 Related Work 

The literature on fault location in power distribution systems [ 8, 40 ]are typically characterized as either model-based or data-driven approaches. Model-based methods include impedance-based [ 6, 24 ]and voltage sag-based analysis [ 3 , 45 ], automated outage map-ping [ 37 ], and traveling wave-based techniques [ 26 , 44 ]. Despite their effectiveness in traditional radial settings, these methods often rely on extensive measurement infrastructure to ensure sufficient observability, alongside the static assumptions regarding feeder topology, operating conditions and fault characteristics [ 38 ]. Specif-ically, while traveling wave methods are often hindered by the high capital costs of required high-speed measurement infrastructure, impedance and sag-based strategies are highly sensitive to static topological assumptions. In modern grids, such assumptions can be frequently challenged by the dynamic and evolving operating conditions aforementioned, leading to increased modeling errors and false alarms [7, 31, 40]. Early data-driven methods have been thoroughly investigated to address the shortcomings of conventional model-based approaches, e.g., [ 19 , 27 , 28 ]. Traditional machine learning solutions include k-nearest neighbors (kNN), random forests, decision trees, and support vector machines (SVMs), were applied to locate faults by relying on hand-crafted features [ 8]. More recent deep learning approaches, such as CNNs and RNNs, have shown potential due to their ability to extract patterns from raw or minimally processed measurements. While CNNs have been particularly effective in identifying spatial relationships, RNNs (e.g., Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU), Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)) exploit temporal patterns in sequential data [ 1, 36 ]. Still, these data-driven methods often lack topological awareness (i.e., they cannot fully represent the non-uniform electrical connectivity between buses) [ 7 ]. This lack of structural insight may limit their location performance. GNNs have seen increasing attention for fault location due to their ability to leverage the topological relations inherent in power networks. Originally proposed by Gori et al. [ 13 , 42 ], GNNs are specifically designed to process graph-structured data, which nat-urally translates to power systems, as network components such as buses and their interconnecting distribution power lines can be modeled as graph nodes and edges. Through message passing, GNNs aggregate information from neighboring busses to capture spatial dependencies across the feeder [25]. Specifically for our considered fault location problem, Chen et al. [ 7 ] use Spectral Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) which perform convolutions via the feeder’s Laplacian matrix in the graph Fourier domain, thus enabling capturing global structural infor-mation across all buses. Still, while effective at leveraging global information, spectral GNNs have traditionally faced scalability chal-lenges in power systems because they require a global mapping of the entire network’s structure. Although polynomial approx-imations [ 10 , 17 ] have significantly reduced this computational overhead, these methods remain tied to a fixed global basis. Conse-quently, while data augmentation can provide a degree of stability against unseen reconfigurations [ 7], significant topological changes still require a realignment of these global filters to match the new grid structure, making them theoretically less flexible for highly dynamic environments [25]. 

Spatial GCNs on the other hand, unlike spectral methods, op-erate directly on the graph’s node and edge features, aggregating information from neighboring nodes to capture local dependencies, while avoiding the computationally expensive recalculation of the entire graph. Hence, spatial GCNs are particularly suitable for fault location, given that it is a task that primarily relies on local network structure. Lakouraj et al. [ 31 ] reduce the computational complexity of spectral GCNs by using a linearized spectral filter, which can be viewed as an approximate transition toward spatial graph con-volution. Ma et al. [ 30 ] explicitly approximate spectral GCNs to spatial GCNs, applying the general framework proposed by Kipf and Welling [ 23 ] to the fault location task. Another approach to incorporate the spatial structure of the feeder is [ 9], who uses Gated Graph Neural Networks (GGNNs) for fault location, extending stan-dard GNNs to iteratively update the hidden states of nodes through successive iterations. Zhang et al. [ 51 ] proposed the GDIA-GCL framework to handle fault location in distribution networks with sparse measurement infrastructure. This two-stage approach first uses a Graph Dirichlet Imputation Algorithm (GDIA) to estimate missing bus measurements, followed by a GCN model trained with Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL) to better distinguish fault signa-tures under extreme data scarcity. The GNN methods discussed so far solely focus on spatial rela-tionships, and thus do not cater specifically for the temporal dynam-ics inherent in fault events. To address this shortcoming, Nguyen et al. [ 35 ] proposed a hybrid model that combines a 1D-CNN and a GCN for fault diagnosis (i.e., to detect, localize, and classify the faults), where the 1D-CNN is used to capture temporal patterns and then a GCN [23] model extracts spatial correlations. Later, in [36], they improved this approach by adding Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks, which are well suited for modeling sequential dependencies in time series data. Later, Wang et al. [ 47 ] introduced a temporal GCN that divides time-series data into patches and uses multi-scale fusion strategies to better exploit temporal features. Together, these approaches illustrate how temporal and spatial in-formation can be jointly addressed for fault diagnosis in power systems. In terms of GNN model architectures, a limitation of GCNs [ 23 ]is that they rely on a fixed, degree-based normalization of the graph to aggregate the information from neighbors. This dependence can reduce their adaptability when the graph structure changes [ 16 ,46 ], e.g., when the feeder topology is changed to switches open-ing/closing. Hence, GCNs may be less suited to practical fault lo-cation scenarios, where network configurations can change. Thus, alternatively, Graph Attention Networks (GATs) [ 46 ] have been proposed: e.g., Wang et al. [ 48 ] leverage an attention mechanism to weigh the importance of neighboring nodes when aggregat-ing information for fault location. By learning these node-specific weights, GATs reduce their reliance on a fixed graph structure and, in return, focus more on local connections. To not only capture the spatial feeder structure, but also leverage temporal aspects, Ngo et al. [ 34 ] further extend GAT models by incorporating a 1D-CNN to capture temporal information, using both voltage and branch cur-rent inputs to detect, localize and classify faults. Still, these works using GATs leave some remaining challenges unaddressed. First of all, the proposed solutions assume near-complete visibility of all 3-phase bus measurements, and do not account for 1- or 2-phase Robustness of STGNNs for Fault Location in Partially Observable Grids 

Figure 1: Model architecture of the (a) shared GRU for local classification per node, aggregated via soft voting (summing node probabilities and taking the max), (b) STGNN pipeline, where GRU embeddings of all nodes are processed by GNN layers with message passing, dropout, and batch normalization, with each variant using its respective architecture (see §3.3), followed by soft voting. 𝑁 : number of nodes, 𝐹 : number of features (e.g., phase voltages), 𝑆 : sequence length (i.e., number of timesteps in the considered measurement window), 𝑍 : GRU hidden state dimension (and hence output), 𝑍 ′: GNN output dimension. 

lines, thus failing to reflect realistic feeder conditions with limited measurement infrastructure deployment. Furthermore, they did not explore the potential benefits of considering asymmetric attention mechanisms, i.e., where information might flow differently along the connection (detailed in §3.3.3). Alternatively, GraphSAGE architectures have been explored to enhance the scalability and robustness of fault localization. Graph-SAGE shifts the learning process from global graph embeddings to localized neighborhood signatures by performing graph sub-sampling, and using local aggregation functions [ 16 ]. For instance, GSAGE-GAT [ 49 ] combines GraphSAGE’s local aggregation layers with attention-based weighting to improve the model’s expres-siveness across complex feeder sections. Furthermore, to address challenges regarding measurement noise, Fan et al. [ 11 ] integrated a Variational Graph Auto-Encoder (VGAE) with GraphSAGE. How-ever, existing GraphSAGE-based approaches often (i) neglect the temporal nature of fault waveforms and (ii) do not sufficiently ad-dress the challenge of partial observability, where sparse sensor placement limits the available feature set at each node. In summary, while GNNs have demonstrated significant poten-tial for fault location, current research often relies on datasets with limited variety and primarily focuses on dense sensor placement on three-phase buses. Furthermore, these studies typically maintain a 1-to-1 mapping between the GNN graph and the physical feeder without exploring alternative graph representations that can better reflect partial observability, and there is no rigorous performance comparison across various GNN architectures. 

## 3 Methodology 

To address the gaps of the current fault location studies surveyed above, we design an STGNN pipeline, including two previously unexplored variants, specifically tailored for distribution network fault location and propose a graph construction algorithm that explicitly accounts for the inherent partial observability of the grids. The subsequent subsections describe STGNN components, graph construction algorithm, and, in particular, discuss the GNN models in detail. 

## 3.1 Proposed STGNN framework 

As outlined in § 2, previous research has explored RNNs [ 50 ] to capture the temporal patterns and GNNs [ 7 ] to extract spatial pat-terns in isolation for fault location. Hence, spatio-temporal graph neural networks (RNN+GNNs or also known as STGNNs) have been proposed as a means to jointly model temporal and spatial dependencies [ 36 ]. Our work extends this idea, by systematically comparing a wider range of different GNN architectures, particu-larly — for the first time, to the best of our knowledge — adopting GraphSAGE and GATv2 for distribution grid fault location. We thus design an STGNN pipeline, summarized in Fig. 1(b), that integrates temporal and spatial feature extraction. The node-level representations z𝑖 produced by the GRU ( §3.2) are then processed by a GNN ( §3.3) using the given graph structure to extract spatial relationships. Finally, the GNN outputs z′ 

> 𝑖

are passed through a dense classifier layer to produce node-level predictions. These pre-dictions are aggregated at inference time via a soft voting scheme [ 18 ], where the probabilities for each location, including a possi-ble ’no fault’ case, are summed across all nodes to produce a final prediction ˆ𝑦 while mitigating the influence of extreme node-level outputs. For the GNN graph, we model distribution network as a graph 

𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸 ), where 𝑉 is the set of 𝑁 nodes (buses), i.e., |𝑉 | = 𝑁 , and 𝐸 

is the set of edges (branches) interconnecting them. Yet, the GNN’s graph topology does not necessarily need to be a 1-on-1 mapping of the feeder’s bus topology (i.e., full topology ). Instead, we propose a measured-only graph construction algorithm that reflects inher-ent partial observability resulting from the practical deployment constraints of real-world distribution systems, by systematically mapping measured ( μPMU) nodes as graph nodes 𝑉 .Following the systematic approach outlined in our proposed algorithm Algorithm 1, we derive the GNN’s measured-only graph by mapping the physical electrical connectivity and multi-phase characteristics of the feeder onto a set of measured nodes ( μPMUs). Consistent with typical distribution network configurations, we assume that three-phase μPMUs ( 𝑣 ∈ P ) are located along the pri-mary feeder backbone (main distribution lines), whereas single-or two-phase μPMUs ( 𝑢 ∈ P ) are deployed solely on the lateral B. Karabulut et al. 

Algorithm 1: Graph Construction for the ‘measured-only’ Topology                                                                                                                                

> Input: Set of μPMUs P(single-, two-, three-phase), substation 𝑂
> (e.g., bus 150 in Fig. 2) and physical feeder topology T
> Output: Graph 𝐺 =(𝑉 , 𝐸 )
> 1𝑉 ← P ,𝐸 ← ∅ ;
> 2foreach three-phase μPMU 𝑣 ∈ P starting from the substation 𝑂 and following the electrical connectivity do
> 3Let 𝑁 3
> 𝑣 ⊂ P be the three-phase μPMUs accessible from 𝑣 in T;
> 4foreach neighbor 𝑤 ∈𝑁 3
> 𝑣 , ordered by distance to 𝑣 do
> 5Connect 𝑣 ↔𝑤 , unless this creates a closed loop;
> 6foreach single- or two-phase μPMU 𝑢 ∈ P do
> 7Let 𝑁 3
> 𝑢 , 𝑁 1,2
> 𝑢 ⊂ P be the three-phase, resp. the single- or two-phase μPMUs accessible from 𝑢 in T;
> 8if 𝑢 lies between two three-phase μPMUs {𝑣, 𝑤 }in Tthen
> 9Connect 𝑢 ↔𝑣 ;
> 10 Connect 𝑢 ↔𝑤 ;
> 11 else if |𝑁 3
> 𝑢 | ≥ 1then
> 12 Connect 𝑢 ↔𝑣 , where 𝑣 ∈𝑉 ′is the μPMU closest to 𝑢 (or the unique μPMU if |𝑁 𝑢 |=1) in T;
> 13 else if |𝑁 1,2
> 𝑢 |>0then
> 14 Connect 𝑢 ↔𝑚 , where 𝑚 ∈𝑁 𝑠 𝑢 is closest to 𝑢 ;
> 15 return 𝐺 =(𝑉 , 𝐸 );

branches. Beginning from the substation, each three-phase μPMU 

𝑣 is connected to all its adjacent three-phase μPMUs 𝑤 ∈ 𝑁 𝑣 , be-ginning with those in closest electrical proximity 1, provided that they do not form a closed loop in the feeder topology. Next, Single-or two-phase μPMUs 𝑢 are connected to the closest three-phase 

μPMU 𝑣 ∈ 𝑁 𝑢 , unless solitary single- or two-phase μPMU 𝑢 is lo-cated between two three-phase μPMUs 𝑣 and 𝑤 forming a closed loop — in such instances, 𝑢 is connected to both 𝑣 and 𝑤 . Lastly, connections between single- or two-phase μPMUs 𝑢 are formed only when they serve as the sole path for current flow, i.e., when they have no accessible three-phase μPMU ( |𝑁 𝑢 | = 0). In contrast, full-topology graph includes both measured and unmeasured buses are included as nodes, and edges are defined by directly mapping the physical line connections between buses. This not only implies that part of the GNN input data are reduced to zeros — as no meaningful measurement data exists for unmea-sured buses — but also increases the graph size, which in return increase computational load. Further, assigning zero-valued fea-tures to the unmeasured buses propagate noise [ 41 ] across the feeder, potentially complicating the GNN model’s capability to still infer the correct conclusions from measured graph nodes. In either case, the GNN graph structure is defined by the adjacency matrix 

𝐴 ∈ { 0, 1}𝑁 ×𝑁 , with 𝐴 𝑢,𝑣 = 1 if (𝑢, 𝑣 ) ∈ 𝐸 (i.e., if nodes 𝑢 and 𝑣 are directly connected by an edge), and 0 otherwise.   

> 1We refer to distance as electrical proximity along the feeder topology Trather than physical distance between the busses.

## 3.2 Temporal Feature Extraction – Recurrent Neural Networks 

Fault events in distribution networks inherently form time series data. RNNs are widely used to process such temporal dependen-cies [ 5], with LSTM and GRU cells being well-known variants. While LSTMs are designed to preserve long-term dependencies, fault patterns in power systems are typically confined to relatively short time windows. Given the simpler architecture and higher computational efficiency of GRUs [ 4], we chose to use GRU cells in our RNN+GNN models to extract temporal features from the measurements. From each single measured node 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 , a fixed time window of measurements (i.e., per-phase RMS voltages, represent-ing the root-mean-square value of the AC voltage) is fed into the GRU, which produces representations that are then input to the GNN, as illustrated in Fig. 1. 

## 3.3 Spatial Feature Extraction – Graph Neural Networks 

In a GNN framework, each node 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 is associated with a feature vector 𝐻 𝑣 ∈ R𝑑 , forming the node feature matrix 𝐻 ∈ R𝑁 ×𝑑 , where the 𝑖 -th row corresponds to the features of the 𝑖 -th node in 𝑉 . In GNNs in general, also edges can have their own set of features (e.g., reflecting geographical distance), which then typically modulate the influence of neighboring nodes. Yet, here we only use node features. Graph learning aims to map node and edge features of a graph 𝐺 

to target outputs (in our case this will be a fault location), formally represented as: 

ˆ𝑦 = 𝑓 (𝐺 ; 𝜃 ), (1) where 𝜃 denotes the model parameters, and ˆ𝑦 represents the pre-dicted output. GNNs learn node representations by iteratively ag-gregating information from neighboring nodes across layers: 

𝐻 (𝑘 +1) = 𝑓 (𝐻 (𝑘 ) , 𝐴 ; 𝜃 ), (2) where 𝐻 (𝑘 ) ∈ R𝑁 ×𝑑 𝑘 represents the node representation matrix at the output of layer 𝑘 . This matrix is formed by row vectors ℎ(𝑘 ) 

> 𝑣

,with each vector representing a node 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 with a 𝑑 𝑘 -dimensional feature vector at layer 𝑘 . This iterative aggregation is known as a message passing framework, in which each node 𝑣 updates its repre-sentation by aggregating the features from its neighbors 𝑢 ∈ N ( 𝑣 ),with the neighborhood N ( 𝑣 ) including the node 𝑣 itself via self-loops, to ensure its features are preserved during aggregation (i.e., 

𝑣 ∈ N ( 𝑣 )). GNN architectures vary in how message passing is per-formed, using different aggregation rules and non-linear activation functions 𝜙 (·) applied after aggregation to compute 𝑓 in eq. (2). Our study involves three GNN variants: 

3.3.1 Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN). In a GCN, the node representations are updated by aggregating features from neighbor-ing nodes using a normalized adjacency matrix ˆ𝐴 [23 ]. This update can be expressed as: 

𝐻 (𝑘 +1) = 𝜙 

 ˆ𝐴 𝐻 (𝑘 ) 𝑊 



, 𝑊 ∈ R𝑑 𝑘 ×𝑑 𝑘 (3) with ˆ𝐴 = 𝐷 −1/2 𝐴 ′ 𝐷 −1/2, ˆ𝐴 ∈ R𝑁 ×𝑁 . (4) Here 𝑊 denotes a learnable weight matrix, and 𝑑 𝑘 is the feature di-mension. The modified adjacency matrix 𝐴 ′ = 𝐴 + 𝐼 adds self-loops Robustness of STGNNs for Fault Location in Partially Observable Grids 

by including the identity matrix 𝐼 . This is the matrix representation of the augmented neighborhood 𝑣 ∈ N ( 𝑣 ). The degree matrix 𝐷 

normalizes the adjacency, weighting the contributions of neigh-boring nodes based on their connectivity in the graph. Thus, ˆ𝐴 

amounts to fixed degree-normalized connectivity, that is used to aggregate features from neighboring nodes and further weighted by 𝑊 .

3.3.2 GraphSAGE (Graph Sample and Aggregation). In GraphSAGE, node’s representation is updated using a learned aggregation func-tion over its neighbors [ 16 ], rather than relying on a fixed normaliza-tion that depends on the given topology, as the degree-normalized adjacency ˆ𝐴 that GCN uses. This implies that GraphSAGE can more flexibly accommodate structural changes in the graphs, such as vari-ations in node neighborhoods, at inference. The updated feature vector for node 𝑣 at layer 𝑘 + 1 is given by: 2

ℎ(𝑘 +1) 

> 𝑣

= 𝜙 



𝑊 · concat 



ℎ(𝑘 ) 

> 𝑣

, AGG 



{ℎ(𝑘 ) 

> 𝑢

|𝑢 ∈ N ( 𝑣 )} 

 

. (5) In this update, 𝑊 is a learnable weight matrix, concat is the concate-nation operation, and AGG represents a neighborhood aggregation function. Note that, unlike the standard GraphSAGE [ 16 ], we in-clude the node itself in the neighborhood set (i.e. 𝑣 ∈ N ( 𝑣 )) to reinforce the node’s features alongside the explicit concatenation. 

3.3.3 Improved Graph Attention Network (GATv2). GATv2 intro-duces an attention-based message passing mechanism that adap-tively weighs the contributions of neighboring nodes [ 2 ]. The rep-resentation of a node 𝑣 at layer 𝑘 + 1 is computed as: 

ℎ(𝑘 +1) 

> 𝑣

= 𝜙 ©«∑︁ 𝑢 ∈ N ( 𝑣 )

𝛼 𝑣𝑢 𝑊 ℎ (𝑘 )

> 𝑢

ª®¬

. (6) Here, 𝛼 𝑣𝑢 ∈ R represents the attention coefficient between nodes 𝑣 

and 𝑢 , determining the relative importance of the features of node 

𝑢 for updating node 𝑣 , and is calculated as: 

𝛼 𝑣𝑢 =

exp 



𝑎 𝑇 · LeakyReLU (𝑊 1 ℎ(𝑘 ) 

> 𝑣

+ 𝑊 2 ℎ(𝑘 ) 

> 𝑢

)

Í𝑗 ∈ N ( 𝑣 ) exp 



𝑎 𝑇 · LeakyReLU (𝑊 1 ℎ(𝑘 ) 

> 𝑣

+ 𝑊 2 ℎ(𝑘 ) 

> 𝑗

)

 , (7) where 𝑎 is a learnable attention vector and LeakyReLU denotes a nonlinear activation. The earlier Graph Attention Network (GAT) proposed by Velick-ovic et al. [ 46 ] computed attention as a linear combination of fea-tures ( 𝑊 ℎ 𝑣 || 𝑊 ℎ 𝑢 ), which applies the same linear transformation 

𝑊 to both nodes before concatenation, and the nonlinearity is ap-plied after the attention is computed. In contrast, GATv2 provides (i) more flexibility by using separate learnable weights ( 𝑊 1 and 𝑊 2)that allow for asymmetric neighbor contributions, and (ii) greater expressiveness by applying the nonlinearity (LeakyRELU) before the attention vector ( 𝑎 ) multiplication.    

> 2The original GraphSAGE model alternatively proposes a sampled subset N′(𝑣 ) ⊂ N ( 𝑣 )rather than the full set of neighbors. However, as the number of measured nodes is limited and full-batch training remains computationally efficient, we consider GraphSAGE without subsampling (see §4.3).

## 4 Experimental Setup 4.1 Fault Types 

Power system faults are broadly divided into two categories: open-circuit and short-circuit faults [ 15 ]. Open-circuit faults arise when a conductor breaks, interrupting the normal flow of current, whereas 

short-circuit faults occur due to unintended contact between con-ductors or between a conductor and ground, leading to excessive current flow. Among these, short-circuit faults receive the most attention in fault location studies, given their higher frequency and significant impact on system stability. Short-circuit faults can be further classified as asymmetrical faults (line-to-ground (LG), line-to-line (LL), and double line-to-ground (LLG)) and symmetrical faults such as three-phase faults [14]. In practice, these broad categories translate into 11 distinct fault types: three LG faults (AG, BG, CG), three LL faults (AB, BC, CA), three LLG faults (ABG, BCG, CAG), and two symmetrical types (three-phase, ABC; and three-phase-to-ground, ABCG). In our study, we consider all 11 fault types to capture the diversity of fault scenar-ios in practice and enable a thorough assessment of fault location. 

## 4.2 Simulation Setup and Data Collection 

The performance of the proposed data-driven models depends on access to high-quality and diverse datasets. Since fault data in dis-tribution networks are scarce — due to the infrequent occurrence of faults and inherent partial observability occurring from lim-ited measurement infrastructure — we generate synthetic data 3 via simulations in OpenDSS [ 43 ] using the PyDSS interface [ 33 ]. Our experiments are carried out on the IEEE 123-bus feeder, a widely adopted benchmark in fault diagnosis studies [ 7 , 35 , 36 ], which operates at a frequency of 60 Hz and a nominal voltage of 4.16 kV. Short-circuit Fault durations in distribution systems typically range from 20 ms to 50 ms , reflecting a typical primary protection clearing time; in this study, we fix the duration at 20 ms for con-sistency. As illustrated in Fig. 2, faults are dynamically injected at 25 different locations, each covering one of the 11 fault classes, while measurements are recorded by 𝑁 = 25 idealized micro-phasor measurement units ( μPMUs) (which partly coincide with some of the considered failure locations). Measurement data are sampled at 1 ms resolution, such that each fault event is represented by a sequence of 20 samples, enabling detailed fault profile analysis. For each of the 25 fault scenarios, we run 100 different simula-tions, from which we record the three-phase RMS voltage magni-tudes ( 𝑉 1, 𝑉 2, 𝑉 3) at each of the 25 μPMU locations. To create suffi-cient diversity among such 100 runs per fault case, we vary both the bus loads and the resistance on the faults (between lines or from line to ground). For the bus loads, to represent a wide spectrum of operating conditions, we scale the load given by the standard IEEE 123-bus configuration: for each of the physical buses, we inde-pendently multiply its original load with a factor 𝐿 ∼ U ( 0.5, 1.3).Here, the lower bound ( 0.5) represents off-peak conditions (e.g., nigh-time when residential and commercial activity is at its low-est), while the upper bound ( 1.3) represents peak demand periods (e.g., mid-afternoon when industrial consumption is at its highest). 

> 3Generating synthetic data is standard practice in distribution grid fault studies as real-world datasets are scarce and typically restricted due to security, and proprietary concerns [7, 36]. B. Karabulut et al.

Figure 2: IEEE 123-node feeder with fault and μPMU loca-tions. 

The resistance for the fault in a particular scenario is picked from 

𝑅 𝑓 ∈ { 0.1, 1, 10 } Ω, representing near-bolted, low and moderate fault resistance respectively. From the μPMU measurement data streams, we record a 60 ms window, starting 40 ms before the fault, from which we thus extract 40 overlapping sliding windows of 𝑆 = 20 timesteps ( 20 ms ). Each sliding window serves as one input sample to our classification models (GRU or STGNN). Half of the windows correspond to the fault-free condition, while the other half capture fault events. In total, this yields 2.5 million windows, with 50% non-fault cases and 2% for each fault location. Table 1 summarizes our data generation configurations. These specifications apply independently to each feeder configuration considered in this study (detailed in § 4.3), including the switch-reconfigured state used for resilience testing. Finally, the dataset is randomly partitioned into 70% training, 15% validation, and 15% test sets. To preserve temporal consistency across μPMUs, sliding windows from the same time step are kept together during splitting. As features, voltage is selected over current, as it is more com-monly available through existing infrastructure without the need for additional sensors; furthermore, voltage provides a more stable signal across the feeder for fault analysis [ 36 ]. We specifically use RMS values instead of raw instantaneous waveforms, as this is consistent with the data that μPMUs output in practice, while it also reduces communication overhead [20]. 

## 4.3 Model Training and Evaluation 

Fault classification is formulated as a multi-class problem with 26 labels ( 25 fault locations, and a no-fault label) and optimized using the cross-entropy loss function. During STGNN training, classification is applied at the node level, producing a separate prediction for each node. At inference time, graph-level predictions are obtained by aggregating the node-level outputs using a soft voting scheme, as described in § 3.1. As a baseline to assess the performance of GNN-based solutions, we consider a pure RNN 

Table 1: Dataset Information Elements Value Number                     

> Fault type AG, BG, CG, AB, BC, CA, ABG, BCG, CAG, ABC, ABCG 11 Fault resistance ( Ω)0.1, 1.0, 10 3Fault position (Buses) 7, 13, 18, 21, 25, 29, 35, 42, 47, 51, 53, 55, 57, 62, 65, 72, 80, 83, 86, 89, 93, 97, 99, 101, 108 25
> μPMU location 1, 6, 13, 18, 25, 26, 33, 35, 36, 45, 47, 54, 60, 69, 75, 76, 81, 84, 91, 97, 103, 105, 109, 113, 300 25 Load Multiplier (p.u.) Uniformly sampled from [0.5, 1.3] 1000
> Dataset Distribution Category Train Set Validation Set Test Set
> Fault Cases 875,000 187,500 187,500 No Fault Cases 875,000 187,500 187,500 Total Cases 1,750,000 375,000 375,000

solution: an aggregated GRU model (Fig. 1(a)) applied independently to each μPMU and node-level predictions are then aggregated using the same soft voting process. We implemented all models in PyTorch, using the PyTorch Geo-metric (PyG) library [ 12 ] for GNN models, on a device equipped with an Intel Core i5-9500 CPU (3.00 GHz) and 64 GB of RAM. We normalize all features (𝑉 1, 𝑉 2, 𝑉 3) using Z-score normalization, such that each feature has a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1 .To ensure a fair comparison, both the proposed STGNN frame-work and the GRU baseline use an identical temporal extraction layer consisting of GRU cells with a hidden state size of 128 . In the STGNN architecture, this is followed by GNN layers with a hidden dimension of 64 . For the GraphSAGE-based models (RGSAGE), we use full-batch training with either mean or max pooling as the aggregation function [ 16 ]. While GraphSAGE is widely known for enhancing scalability via neighborhood sampling (mini-batch set-ting) in massive graphs, full-batch training is highly feasible in our study since we only have a modest number of measured nodes. Fi-nally, for all models, these latent representations are passed through a dense layer to produce a 26 -dimensional logits for each node. Rec-tified Linear Units (ReLU) are used as activation functions within the network. Softmax is applied to the output logits at inference time to obtain class probabilities, which are then used for soft vot-ing aggregation. During training, PyTorch’s cross-entropy loss [ 39 ]internally applies log-softmax to the logits for numerical stability. To mitigate overfitting, we apply dropout 0.35 and batch normal-ization; for GAT models, we additionally use an attention dropout rate of 0.3 and use four attention heads. Models are trained using the AdamW optimizer [ 29 ] with a batch size of 32 . AdamW ex-tends the Adam algorithm by decoupling weight decay from the gradient-based updates. We set the weight decay to 1 × 10 −4 and the learning rate to 0.001 . The GRU baseline is trained for 11 epochs, while GNN-based models are trained for 15 epochs. Performance is evaluated using F1 score on the test set. Measurement devices such as μPMUs are costly, and typically not installed at each and every bus in the distribution grid, but only a subset of them. To reflect this partial observability, we construct GNN graph using our measured-only graph construction algorithm (detailed in §3.1) that uses only the 𝑁 = 25 measured buses as nodes. Fig. 3a illustrates the resulting reduced measured-only graphs ob-tained for the IEEE 123-bus feeder. Then, to systematically assess Robustness of STGNNs for Fault Location in Partially Observable Grids  

> (a) Default configuration (Blue) (b) Lateral-redirected configuration (Green)

Figure 3: IEEE 123-node feeder measured-only graph representations, drawn to resemble the feeder layout for easier visual correspondence. The default configuration (a) is shown on the left (blue), while the lateral-redirected configuration (b) on the right (green) is achieved via switching operations, resulting in subtle voltage variations across the feeder. 

the impact of our measured-only approach, we contrast it against commonly used 1-on-1 mapping full topology baseline ( 𝑁 = 128 ,including the 123 standard buses plus 5 auxiliary buses for regula-tors, transformer secondaries, and switches) to assess the impact of graph representation on fault location. In this case zero feature values are used for the unmeasured buses, and their outputs are masked during loss computation and final prediction. To further evaluate our measured-only graph strategy and the models under more challenging operating conditions, we perform switch reconfiguration — which we refer to as the green configu-ration — specifically by opening the tie-switch between buses 60 and 160 and closing the switch between buses 54 and 94 (shown in Fig. 3b). The green configuration introduces structural variations in the network and reroutes power flow through lateral branches, leading to weaker fault signatures as we observe more subtle volt-age variations across the measured nodes. We train and evaluate models on their respective configurations. 

## 5 Results and Discussion 

We now present a quantitative performance analysis of the GRU and STGNN models on the IEEE 123-bus system across two dis-tinct feeder configurations: the default configuration and the green 

configuration characterized by more subtle voltage variations and weaker fault signals (see Fig. 3b). We first compare the fault location performance across the RNN baseline and various STGNN models (§5.1). Next, we examine the benefit of our proposed measured-only 

topology over the conventional full-topology graph strategy (§5.2). In both cases, we will also investigate the influence of the feeder topology on the performance achieved by the respective models and graph construction methods. 

## 5.1 RNN and STGNN Model Comparison 

To evaluate the performance of different architectures for fault location under sparse μPMU coverage, we perform a systematic benchmarking study by comparing our proposed RNN+GNN mod-els (RGSAGE and RGAT) against a state-of-the-art graph model (RGCN) and a non-GNN baseline (GRU). Specifically, we investigate (i) whether explicit spatial modeling via GNNs provides superior performance over a purely temporal GRU baseline, and (ii) which GNN architecture performs best under sparse measurement con-ditions. Note that we here discuss the various GNN-based models’ performance using the measured-only topology graphs. We first examine the fault location performance of the RNN-only and RNN+GNN models for the default configuration . As Fig. 4 shows, the RNN-only model using GRU architecture as discussed previously, only reaches F1 ≃ 0.86 . This is consistent with the performance of RNN-based fault location on the IEEE 123-bus system as observed in [ 36 ], who consider a similar dataset and data processing con-ditions. 4 Note that our result is obtained by using the soft-voting aggregation of individual nodes’ predictions (as discussed in §3.3): for GRU this boosts the node-level predictions with an increase of roughly 0.10 in F1 score. In contrast, the GNN-based models achieve a substantial improve-ment over the RNN baseline, with the F1 score rising from ≃,0.86 to ≃, 0.95 . Notably, for these models, the soft-voting step adds only 

∼ 0.01 to the F1 score. This better performance of GNN-based mod-els, along with the comparably smaller impact of aggregation, is what we intuitively expect from GNNs’ ability to process topo-logical relationships (i.e., structure and connectivity of the graph), allowing them to effectively combine distributed inputs into a global view through message passing. Interestingly, as shown in Fig. 4, all GNN-based variants yield statistically similar results (F1 ranging from 94 .7 ± 0.3 to 94 .9 ± 0.6). This suggests that for the default IEEE 123-bus feeder configuration, the spatial dependencies are sufficiently captured even by relatively simple GNN architectures such as RGCN. This again aligns with the findings in [ 36 ], where — under the similar dataset and processing 

> 4Nguyen et al. [36] obtain 85.3 fault location F1 for their LSTM model. B. Karabulut et al.

Figure 4: F1 scores for fault location comparing the default (solid bars) and lateral-redirected green (hatched bars) configurations, where RGSAGE models are denoted as RS. The results are grouped by topology: GRU baseline (left), measured-only (middle), and full topology (right). Error bars represent the 90% confidence intervals across models trained with different random seeds. 

conditions mentioned earlier — transitioning from an RNN to a GNN yielded a significant performance jump from ∼ 0.85 to ∼ 0.92 .Now, when we consider more challenging grid conditions — which, best to our knowledge, related works did not study yet — such as green configuration shown in Fig. 3b, we obtain qualitatively similar observations. In that green configuration, the redirected power flow through lateral branches leads to weaker fault signa-tures. This reduces the magnitude of voltage deviations across the measured nodes, making the distinction between fault-induced transients and nominal load profiles more subtle. Hence, as shown in Fig. 4, we observe a performance decrease across all architec-tures. The GRU baseline’s F1 score drops to 75 .5, with its confidence interval widening from 4.4 to 7.5, indicating increased instability under weaker fault signal conditions. In contrast, the GNN models maintain a much tighter performance cluster between F1 86 and 88. These results demonstrates the GNNs’ superior performance and robustness, both across randomness in the training process (i.e., for different random seeds) and, perhaps more importantly, over different physical grid feeder configurations. Indeed, the GRU exhibits lower overall performance and a wide confidence interval that increases considerably under the more challenging green con-figuration, while the GNN variants maintain significantly higher mean 𝐹 1 scores and much narrower error bars. This superiority of GNN-based solutions over pure RNN ones is consistent with intuition and confirms earlier assessments in literature. Regarding our comprehensive benchmarking of multiple GNN architecture variants, ultimately, we do not find a definitive su-periority of one GNN architecture over the others. Mostly, their performance seems on par, for both the default as the more chal-lenging green configuration. Still, from the numerical results, we do observe that the relative ranking of models shifts under more challenging fault signal conditions. While RGATv2 nominally leads in the default case, RGSAGE-Max ( 87 .9 ± 0.9) performs best in the green configuration. This potentially suggests that when fault signals are less pronounced (hence the relative importance of in-dividual nodes is harder for the model to identify), the attention mechanism as adopted in RGATv2 does not provide a distinct bene-fit over simpler aggregation; instead, max-pooling is more effective at capturing the subtle, peak signals necessary for fault location in green configuration. Since GNN architectures were originally designed to process larger and more complex networks (e.g., social network graphs), that all considered GNN models are equally successful, in hind-sight may be unsurprising. Yet, we hypothesize that advanced GNN models may offer more noticeable benefits when we complicate the fault location problem, e.g., when evaluating its generalization to a priori unseen feeder configurations (and thus different logical GNN graphs), e.g., to maintain robust performance of pre-trained models to cases where additional μPMUs are installed at new loca-tions and/or the distribution feeder’s topology changes because of changed switch configurations. 

## 5.2 Logical Graph Topology Comparison 

Now that we have established the superiority of GNN-based models perform best, we investigate the impact of the choice of GNN graph topology construction on fault location performance. More specifi-cally, we compare STGNN models trained on the traditionally used 

full-topology graphs (where unmeasured nodes are included in the graph topology, but masked with zeros) with those using our pro-posed measured-only graphs to evaluate their relative performance and computational complexity. For the default configuration , we note that there is virtually no performance difference between the two topology choices, which both achieve F1 ≃ 95 , and thus our proposed measured-only topol-ogy does not offer a performance benefit. However, for the green 

configuration — where fault signals are less pronounced compared to default configuration — performance for the STGNN models based on the full-topology graph drops significantly, down to F1 ≃ 71 ,whereas our measured-only approach loses way less and still achieves Robustness of STGNNs for Fault Location in Partially Observable Grids 

F1 ≃ 86 to 88 . The observed performance drop for the full topol-ogy models in the green configuration, at first may seem a little counter-intuitive: despite the models now being informed of the complete feeder topology, classification performance decreases. Such decrease can be explained by the message passing mecha-nism of GNNs: the non-μPMU nodes, that are now also part of the 

full-topology graph, obviously have no measurement data (i.e., its local features have zero values), which can dilute information from measured buses during aggregation. While this effect is seemingly limited for the default grid configuration, where fault signals are more pronounced, the dilution effect proves rather critical in green configuration. In addition to providing superior performance also under weaker fault signal conditions, using our measured-only graph models has another notable advantage: reduced computational requirements for training the classification models. Indeed, training when using 

full-topology graphs takes roughly 6× longer than for measured-only 

graphs, as summarized in Table 2. 5

Although all the GNN-based models share the same asymptotic complexity, i.e., their training time scales linearly with the number of neighbors 𝑘 and feature dimension 𝑑 (i.e., 𝑂 (𝑘𝑑 )), RGATv2 is the most computationally intensive for both graph topology choices, due to the per-edge attention weight calculations (see §3.3). The-oretically, RGSAGE-Max is more expensive than RGSAGE-Mean, because maximum aggregation requires element-wise comparison and argmax tracking logic across neighbors, whereas mean aggre-gation relies on more hardware-efficient summation and averaging. Given the sparse connectivity of the IEEE 123-bus feeder — where most nodes have only 1–2 neighbors — the theoretical difference between mean- and max-pooling computation times disappears into the background noise of the training environment and seed-specific convergence rates. We conclude that RGCN remains the most efficient and stable model ( 363 .17 ± 5.70 min), benefiting from pre-computed adjacency normalization and avoiding the concate-nation overhead found in GraphSAGE (see §3.3). 

Table 2: Run times for training the STGNN models (mean 

± standard deviation, across 5 training runs with different random initialization). Model Training Time (min) 

Measured-only Full-topology RGATv2 65.07 ± 1.18 391.34 ± 19.62 RGSAGE-Max 62.22 ± 1.14 372.38 ± 22.13 RGSAGE-Mean 61.40 ± 0.76 373.33 ± 19.82 RGCN 61.56 ± 0.70 363.17 ± 5.70 In summary, our results demonstrate that RNN+GNN (STGNN) models are highly effective for distribution grid fault location. First, GNN-based architectures demonstrate a clear and consistent su-periority over the RNN-only baseline (i.e., the GRU model). In the 

default configuration , RGNNs offer an 0.9 F1 improvement (reaching     

> 5Note that we report recorded training run times for the challenging green grid con-figuration. Given that the model parameters and number of training samples are not dependent on the grid configuration, and thus training run times are virtually the same for the default grid configuration.

F1 ≃ 0.95 ), while maintaining a ≃ 0.12 lead for the green grid config-uration. Beyond F1 scores, STGNNs prove significantly more robust; their confidence intervals remain narrow in all cases, whereas the GRU exhibits high uncertainty (that further widens from 4.2 to 7.5 under weaker fault signal conditions, i.e., the green grid configu-ration). Second, we find that, while all tested GNN variants are effective, their relative performance is context-dependent. RGATv2 nominally leads in the default case where node importance is more distinct, but RGSAGE-Max (F1 = 87 .9 ± 0.89 ) proves most effective in the green grid configuration. This suggests that max-pooling acts as a robust peak-signal extractor, preserving subtle fault signa-tures that would otherwise be diluted by the weighted averaging of attention mechanisms. Furthermore, our proposed measured-only topology approach demonstrates critical advantages over the conventional full-topology 

approach. While both strategies perform similarly in commonly studied grid conditions, our measured-only approach proves sig-nificantly more resilient to challenging grid parameters: under conditions of weaker fault signals, it maintains an F1 between 86 and 88 , whereas the full-topology performance collapses to ∼ 0.71 ,due to noise propagation from zero-masked nodes. Coupled with a 6-fold reduction in model training time, our findings indicate that a measured-only GNN framework provides a more robust, stable, and computationally efficient solution for real-world distribution networks. 

## 6 Conclusion and Future Work 

The aim of this paper was to comprehensively and systematically (i) compare recent GNN architectures for the task of distribution network fault location, for which we constructed a large-scale dataset of three-phase RMS voltage measurements with sparse 

μPMU placement, and (ii) investigate and systematically compare graph-forming strategies beyond the complete or near-complete feeder topology, for which we introduced a reduced, measured-only 

graph topology that directly reflects the inherent partial observabil-ity of the distribution grids. For item (i), we proposed previously unexplored RNN+GNN models, namely RGSAGE and an improved RGAT variant, and benchmarked them against the state-of-the-art RGCN as well as RNN-only baselines. For item (ii), we are, to the best of our knowledge, the first to systematically compare rep-resentative graph-forming strategies: the conventionally adopted 

full-topology representation including all (and thus also unmea-sured) buses, and our reduced measured-only topology. To assess the robustness of our findings, we evaluated these models across two distinct scenarios: the default configuration representing the standard IEEE 123-bus feeder, and a green configuration obtained through switch reconfigurations, where lateral-redirected path re-sult in much smaller and more subtle voltage changes under fault conditions (see §4.3). Our study shows that GNN-based models consistently outper-form RNN-only baselines for fault location, achieving F1 ≃ 0.95 for the default IEEE 123-bus grid configuration and ≃ 0.86 -0.88 under more challenging fault signal conditions of green configura-tion across all GNN variants. Furthermore, GNN-based approaches demonstrate superior stability in their predictions: while the RNN baseline’s uncertainty widens significantly under challenging grid B. Karabulut et al. 

conditions (with confidence intervals expanding from 4.2 to 7.5 percentage points F1), the STGNNs maintain narrow confidence intervals ( ≤ 1.4 percentage points F1), demonstrating STGNNs’ robustness even when faced with weaker fault signals. Regarding our proposed measured-only graph topology approach, we find that it: (a) provides significant resilience to challenging grid parameters, maintaining an F1 between 0.86 - 0.88 where the full– topology approach collapses to ≃ 0.71 due to noise propagation, and (b) reduces model training times by a factor of 6×. This suggests that the measured-only representation is a more practical choice, offering substantial efficiency gains while maintaining stable per-formance. Besides more extensive analysis of the effect of graph topology choice, further GNN refinements that may boost fault location performance include (a) incorporating edge features such as physical line distances, which may provide richer structural in-formation, and (b) exploring deeper GNN architectures to better understand their impact. The study of these latter items is left for future work. Looking ahead, we also plan to further explore what benefits the newly explored GraphSAGE and RGATv2 models may bring. Even though in our above study they did not achieve notable im-provements upon state-of-the-art GCN models for the studied con-figurations, we hypothesize that GraphSAGE and RGATv2 could offer stronger generalization and transferability of learned models across different feeder configurations and topologies. Specifically, the inductive nature of GraphSAGE makes it a prime candidate for transferring learned fault-location inference to entirely new feeders, while the attention mechanism of GATv2 may better adapt to complex, non-linear dependencies in diverse switch configura-tions. Our future work will therefore extend this study towards exploring generalization capabilities of the proposed GNN-based models, as well as studying their ability to solve additional fault diagnosis tasks, e.g., as fault type classification. 

## Acknowledgments 

Research reported in this publication was supported by VITO grant number VITO_UGENT_PhD_2301 and partially funded by the Flem-ish Government (AI Research Program). 

## References 

[1] L. Alzubaidi, J. Zhang, A. J. Humaidi, A. Al-Dujaili, Y. Duan, O. Al-Shamma, J. Santamaría, M. A. Fadhel, M. Al-Amidie, and L. Farhan. 2021. Review of deep learning: concepts, CNN architectures, challenges, applications, future directions. 

J. Big Data 8, 1 (2021), 53. doi:10.1186/s40537-021-00444-8 [2] S. Brody, U. Alon, and E. Yahav. 2022. How Attentive Are Graph Attention Networks?. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR 2022) . OpenRe-view.net, Virtual Event, 1–26. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2105.1449 [3] Ricardo Fonseca Buzo, Henrique Molina Barradas, and Fábio Bertequini Leão. 2021. A New Method for Fault Location in Distribution Networks Based on Voltage Sag Measurements. IEEE Trans. Power Del. 36, 2 (2021), 651–662. doi:10. 1109/TPWRD.2020.2987892 [4] R. Cahuantzi, X. Chen, and S. Guttel. 2023. A comparison of LSTM and GRU networks for learning symbolic sequences. In Proc. Int. Conf. SAI Intell. Comput. (SAI 2023) (Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems, Vol. 739) . Springer, Cham, Birmingham, UK, 722–740. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-37963-5_53 [5] Y. Cao, J. Tang, S. Shi, D. Cai, L. Zhang, and P. Xiong. 2025. Fault Diagnosis Techniques for Electrical Distribution Network Based on Artificial Intelligence and Signal Processing: A Review. Processes 13 (2025), 48. doi:10.3390/pr13010048 [6] S. Chandran, R. Gokaraju, and K. Narendra. 2024. An extended impedance-based fault location algorithm in power distribution system with distributed generation using synchrophasors. IET Gener. Transm. Distrib. 18, 3 (2024), 479– 490. doi:10.1049/gtd2.13086 [7] K. Chen, J. Hu, Y. Zhang, Z. Yu, and J. He. 2020. Fault Location in Power Distribution Systems via Deep Graph Convolutional Networks. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 38, 1 (Jan 2020), 119. doi:10.1109/JSAC.2019.2951964 [8] K. Chen, C. Huang, and J. He. 2016. Fault detection, classification and location for transmission lines and distribution systems: a review on the methods. High Volt. 1, 1 (2016), 25–33. doi:10.1049/hve.2016.0005 [9] J. T. de Freitas and F. G. F. Coelho. 2021. Fault localization method for power distribution systems based on gated graph neural networks. Electr. Eng. 103 (2021), 2259–2266. doi:10.1007/s00202-021-01223-7 [10] M. Defferrard, X. Bresson, and P. Vandergheynst. 2016. Convolutional Neural Net-works on Graphs with Fast Localized Spectral Filtering. In Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016) . Curran Associates, Inc., Barcelona, Spain, 3844–3852. doi:10.5555/3157382.3157527 [11] M. Fan, J. Xia, H. Zhang, and X. Zhang. 2024. Fault Location Method of Dis-tribution Network Based on VGAE-GraphSAGE. Processes 12, 10 (2024), 2179. doi:10.3390/pr12102179 [12] M. Fey and J. E. Lenssen. 2019. Fast Graph Representation Learning with PyTorch Geometric. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.02428. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1903.02428 [13] M. Gori, G. Monfardini, and F. Scarselli. 2005. A New Model for Learning in Graph Domains. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 20, 1 (2005), 61–80. doi:10.1109/TNN. 2008.2005605 [14] John J. Grainger and William D. Stevenson. 1994. Power System Analysis . McGraw-Hill, New York. [15] S. S. Gururajapathy, H. Mokhlis, and H. A. Illias. 2017. Fault Location and Detec-tion Techniques in Power Distribution Systems with Distributed Generation: A Review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 74 (2017), 949–958. doi:10.1016/j.rser.2017. 03.021 [16] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec. 2017. Inductive Representation Learning on Large Graphs. In Proc. 31st Conf. on Neural Inf. Process. Systems (NeurIPS 2017) .Neural Information Processing Systems Foundation, Long Beach, CA, USA, 3345– 3355. https://doi.org/10.5555/3294771.3294869 [17] D. K. Hammond, P. Vandergheynst, and R. Gribonval. 2011. Wavelets on graphs via spectral graph theory. Appl. Comput. Harmon. Anal. 30, 2 (2011), 129–150. doi:10.1016/j.acha.2010.04.005 [18] Tin Kam Ho, J. J. Hull, and S. N. Srihari. 1994. Decision combination in multiple classifier systems. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 16, 1 (1994), 66–75. doi:10.1109/34.273716 [19] Z. S. Hosseini, M. Mahoor, and A. Khodaei. 2018. AMI-Enabled Distribution Network Line Outage Identification via Multi-Label SVM. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 9, 5 (2018), 5470–5472. doi:10.1109/TSG.2018.2849845 [20] IEEE. 2011. IEEE Standard for Synchrophasor Measurements for Power Systems .doi:10.1109/IEEESTD.2011.6111219 [21] IEEE 2022. IEEE Guide for Electric Power Distribution Reliability Indices . IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA. IEEE Std 1366-2022 (Revision of IEEE Std 1366-2012). [22] International Energy Agency. 2023. Electricity Grids and Secure Energy Transitions .Technical Report. IEA, Paris, France. https://www.iea.org/reports/electricity-grids-and-secure-energy-transitions [23] Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. 2017. Semi-Supervised Classification with Graph Convolutional Networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2017) . OpenReview.net, Toulon, France, 1–14. https://openreview.net/forum?id=S16sL79xl [24] R. Krishnathevar and E. E. Ngu. 2012. Generalized Impedance-Based Fault Location for Distribution Systems. IEEE Trans. Power Del. 27, 1 (jan 2012), 449– 451. doi:10.1109/TPWRD.2011.2170773 [25] W. Liao, B. Bak-Jensen, J. R. Pillai, and Y. Wang. 2022. A review of graph neural networks and their applications in power systems. J. Mod. Power Syst. Clean Energy 10, 2 (2022), 345–360. doi:10.35833/MPCE.2021.000058 [26] F. Liu, L. Xie, K. Yu, Y. Wang, X. Zeng, L. Bi, and X. Tang. 2023. A novel fault location method based on traveling wave for multi-branch distribution network. 

Electr. Power Syst. Res. 224 (2023), 109753. doi:10.1016/j.epsr.2023.109753 [27] H. Livani and C. Y. Evrenosoğlu. 2013. A Fault Classification and Localization Method for Three-Terminal Circuits Using Machine Learning. IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 28, 4 (Oct 2013), 2282–2290. doi:10.1109/TPWRD.2013.2272936 [28] H. Livani, C. Y. Evrenosoğlu, and V. A. Centeno. 2013. A machine learning based faulty line identification for smart distribution network. In Proc. N. Am. Power Symp. (NAPS 2013) . IEEE, Manhattan, KS, USA, 1–5. doi:10.1109/NAPS.2013. 6666829 [29] R. Llugsi, S. E. Yacoubi, A. Fontaine, and P. Lupera. 2021. Comparison between Adam, AdaMax and Adam W optimizers to implement a Weather Forecast based on Neural Networks for the Andean city of Quito. In Proc. IEEE 5th Ecuador Tech. Chapters Meet. (ETCM 2021) . IEEE, Cuenca, Ecuador, 1–6. doi:10.1109/ ETCM53643.2021.9590681 [30] X. Ma, W. Zhen, H. Ren, G. Zhang, K. Zhang, and H. Dong. 2024. A Method for Fault Localization in Distribution Networks with High Proportions of Distributed Generation Based on Graph Convolutional Networks. Energies 17, 22 (2024), 5758. doi:10.3390/en17225758 [31] M. MansourLakouraj, R. Hossain, H. Livani, and M. Ben-Idris. 2021. Application of graph neural network for fault location in PV penetrated distribution grids. In Robustness of STGNNs for Fault Location in Partially Observable Grids 

Proceedings of the North American Power Symposium (NAPS 2021) . IEEE, College Station, TX, USA, 1–6. doi:10.1109/NAPS52732.2021.9654560 [32] J. Momoh. 2012. Smart Grid: Fundamentals of Design and Analysis . IEEE Press/Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, USA. [33] National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). 2024. PyDSS Interface. https: //www.nrel.gov/grid/pydss.html. [34] Q.-H. Ngo, B. L. H. Nguyen, J. Zhang, K. Schoder, H. Ginn, and T. Vu. 2025. Deep graph neural network for fault detection and identification in distribution systems. Electric Power Systems Research 247 (2025), 111721. doi:10.1016/j.epsr. 2025.111721 [35] B. L. H. Nguyen, T. Vu, T.-T. Nguyen, M. Panwar, and R. Hovsapian. 2022. 1-D Convolutional Graph Convolutional Networks for Fault Detection in Distributed Energy Systems. In Proc. IEEE 1st Ind. Electron. Soc. Annu. On-Line Conf. (ONCON 2022) . IEEE, kharagpur, India, 1–6. doi:10.1109/ONCON56984.2022.10126859 [36] B. L. H. Nguyen, T. V. Vu, T.-T. Nguyen, M. Panwar, and R. Hovsapian. 2023. Spatial-Temporal Recurrent Graph Neural Networks for Fault Diagnostics in Power Distribution Systems. IEEE Access 11 (May 2023), 3273292. doi:10.1109/ ACCESS.2023.3273292 [37] M. Numair, A. A. Aboushady, and F. Arraño-Vargas. 2023. Fault detection and localisation in LV distribution networks using a smart meter data-driven digital twin. Energies 16, 23 (2023), 7850. doi:10.3390/en16237850 [38] A. Ojha, V. Panwar, and P. Kant. 2018. Optimization techniques for network reconfiguration in distribution systems: An overview. Natl. J. Multidiscip. Res. 3, 3 (2018), 68–71. [39] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gre-gory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. 2019. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library. In Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS 2019) , Vol. 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 8024–8035. [40] H. Rezapour, S. Jamali, and A. Bahmanyar. 2023. Review on Artificial Intelligence-Based Fault Location Methods in Power Distribution Networks. Energies 16, 12 (2023), 4636. doi:10.3390/en16124636 [41] T. K. Rusch, M. M. Bronstein, and S. Mishra. 2023. A Survey on Oversmoothing in Graph Neural Networks. arXiv:2303.10993 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2303. 10993 [42] F. Scarselli, M. Gori, A. Tsoi, M. Hagenbuchner, and G. Monfardini. 2009. The Graph Neural Network Model. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 20, 1 (2009), 61–80. doi:10.1109/TNN.2008.2005605 [43] The Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI). 2024. OpenDSS. https://www.epri. com/pages/sa/opendss. [44] D. W. P. Thomas, R. J. O. Carvalho, and E. T. Pereira. 2003. Fault location in distribution systems based on traveling waves. In Proc. IEEE Bologna PowerTech Conf. (IEEE 2003) . IEEE, Bologna, Italy, 3. doi:10.1109/PTC.2003.1304595 [45] S. Turizo, G. Ramos, and D. Celeita. 2022. Voltage Sags Characterization Using Fault Analysis and Deep Convolutional Neural Networks. IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications 58, 3 (2022), 3367–3376. doi:10.1109/TIA.2022.3162569 [46] Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Liò, and Yoshua Bengio. 2018. Graph Attention Networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2018) . OpenReview.net, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 1–12. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1710.10903 [47] S. Wang, Q. Fang, N. Li, M. Fan, and Y. Duan. 2026. Fault Location Method for Distribution Network Based on Temporal Graph Convolutional Network. In Proceedings of 2025 Chinese Intelligent Automation Conference (CIAC 2025) (Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering, Vol. 1501) . Springer, Singapore, 456–468. doi:10.1007/978-981-95-4045-7_11 [48] Z. Wang, B. Huang, B. Zhou, J. Chen, and Y. Wang. 2024. An Enhanced Fault Localization Technique for Distribution Networks Utilizing Cost-Sensitive Graph Neural Networks. Processes 12, 11 (2024), 2312. doi:10.3390/pr12112312 [49] T. Wei, H. Zhang, M. Fan, J. Sun, and X. Wang. 2024. Fault Location Method of Distribution Network Based on Improved Graph Neural Network. In Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Power Renew. Energy (ICPRE 2024) . IEEE, Guangzhou, China, 2024, 758–763. doi:10.1109/ICPRE62586.2024.10768568 [50] J. Q. Yu, Y. Hou, A. Y. S. Lam, and V. O. K. Li. 2019. Intelligent fault detection scheme for microgrids with wavelet-based deep neural networks. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid. 10, 2 (2019), 1694–1703. doi:10.1109/TSG.2017.2776310 [51] L. Zhang, D. Hua, T. Ji, T. Qian, and J. Wang. 2025. Fault Location in Power Distribution Networks With Massive Missing Data: A Graph-Based Imputation and Contrastive Learning Approach. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering 22 (2025), 16825–16837. doi:10.1109/TASE.2025.3580658