Title: Ultra-Early Prediction of Tipping Points: Integrating Dynamical Measures with Reservoir Computing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.14944v1

Published Time: Tue, 17 Mar 2026 06:29:48 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
## Ultra-Early Prediction of Tipping Points: Integrating Dynamical Measures with Reservoir Computing 

Xin Li 1,2, Qunxi Zhu 2,3,∗, Chengli Zhao 1,∗, Bolin Zhao 2,3, Xue Zhang 1, Xiaojun Duan 1, and Wei Lin 2,3,4∗

> 1

College of Science, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan 410073, China 

> 2

Research Institute of Intelligent Complex Systems and MOE Frontiers Center for Brain Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China 

> 3

School of Mathematical Sciences, SCMS, SCAM, and CCSB, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China 

> 4

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai 200232, China. 

Complex dynamical systems—such as climate, ecosystems, and economics—can undergo catas-trophic and potentially irreversible regime changes, often triggered by environmental parameter drift and stochastic disturbances. These critical thresholds, known as tipping points, pose a prediction problem of both theoretical and practical significance, yet remain largely unresolved. To address this, we articulate a model-free framework that integrates the measures characterizing the stabil-ity and sensitivity of dynamical systems with the reservoir computing (RC), a lightweight machine learning technique, using only observational time series data. The framework consists of two stages. The first stage involves using RC to robustly learn local complex dynamics from observational data segmented into windows. The second stage focuses on accurately detecting early warning signals of tipping points by analyzing the learned autonomous RC dynamics through dynamical measures, including the dominant eigenvalue of the Jacobian matrix, the maximum Floquet multiplier, and the maximum Lyapunov exponent. Furthermore, when these dynamical measures exhibit trend-like patterns, their extrapolation enables ultra-early prediction of tipping points significantly prior to the occurrence of critical transitions. We conduct a rigorous theoretical analysis of the proposed method and perform extensive numerical evaluations on a series of representative synthetic systems and eight real-world datasets, as well as quantitatively predict the tipping time of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation system. Experimental results demonstrate that our framework exhibits advantages over the baselines in comprehensive evaluations, particularly in terms of dy-namical interpretability, prediction stability and robustness, and ultra-early prediction capability. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Complex dynamical systems (CDSs), ranging from the biological systems [1] and the development of psychiatric disorders [2] to climate [3], economic [4], ecological [5], and social systems [6], can often experience sudden tran-sitions from one state to drastically different states when subjected to minor changes in environmental conditions. The locus of these transitions are commonly known as tipping points, where states with undesirable properties always emerge. For instance, in climate systems, crossing tipping points often has severe consequences for human society and even exacerbate global warming [7]. Thus, the accurate prediction of tipping points in CDSs is of critical importance and broad interest. Recent advancements in both theoretical and empirical research have substantially enhanced our ability to iden-tify tipping points in CDSs. As a system nears a tipping point, it frequently exhibits a phenomenon known as crit-ical slowing down (CSD) [8], which reflects a reduced ca-pacity to recover from local disturbances [9, 10]. Building on this insight, Scheffer et al. [11] synthesized the theo-ries of bifurcation and CSD to identify tipping points us-ing classical early warning signals (EWSs), such as Lag-1     

> ∗E-mail: qxzhu@fudan.edu.cn, chenglizhao@nudt.edu.cn, or wlin@fudan.edu.cn

autocorrelation [12], variance [13], skewness, and flick-ering [14]. While these classical EWSs provide valuable qualitative indicators of critical transitions, their perfor-mance can be inconsistent across different systems, mak-ing it difficult to establish accurate thresholds for tipping point identification or even its early warning. To address these challenges, Bury et al. [15] introduced a deep learning (DL) model trained on the synthetic bi-furcation data, enabling it to predict tipping points in complex scenarios. Building on this, Grziwotz et al. [16] proposed a new EWS based on dynamical eigen-value (DEV) analysis, which leverages the bifurcation theory and local linearization methods to predict tipping points more effectively across both simulated and real-world datasets. Despite their promise, both approaches have limitations. The DL method is often regarded as a “black box” with limited interpretability and minimal in-corporation of prior knowledge from dynamical systems theory. Conversely, the DEV method, while more theo-retically transparent, lacks the adaptability of neural net-works for capturing nonlinear dynamics and is restricted to bifurcations of fixed-point attractors, rendering them unsuitable for periodic or even chaotic systems. Reservoir computing (RC) [17–19], a lightweight ma-chine learning technique, has gained increasing attention for tasks such as reconstruction and prediction in CDSs [20–24]. RC operates at the edge of stability or chaos [25, 26], allowing for the emergence of diverse dynamical behaviors in its hidden states. This flexibility makes RC 

> arXiv:2603.14944v1 [cs.LG] 16 Mar 2026

2particularly well-suited to modeling nonlinear dynamics, such as equilibria, limit cycles, and chaotic attractors [27, 28] solely from the observational time series data. Further improvements have been made by incorporating system parameters into RC methods, as demonstrated by Kong et al. [29], Patel et al. [30] and Panahi et al. [31]. These enhancements allow for more accurate modeling of dynamical systems. While RC has been successfully ap-plied to tipping point prediction [29–31], such successes typically depend on access to comprehensive system pa-rameters and related information, which are often diffi-cult to acquire in real-world scenarios. To overcome these difficulties, we articulate a data-driven framework called the RC-based dynamical mea-sure (RCDyM) method, which integrates RC tech-niques with dynamical measures. Notably, the proposed RCDyM method focuses on estimating three main dy-namical measures related to stability and sensitivity un-der local perturbations. Consequently, our framework does not require varying system parameters as inputs, nor does it depend on precise global modeling of the dynamics at tipping points. This generality makes our framework more versatile, enabling it to be applicable to a broader range of real-world CDSs. The remaining of this article is thus organized as fol-lows. We first introduce the framework of the RCDyM method. This framework, by employing a sliding window strategy, firstly trains the RC, thereby allowing for the analysis of the high-dimensional autonomous RC to es-timate the dynamical indicators of previously unknown systems. Subsequently, these dynamical metrics can not only serve as early-warning signals for critical transitions, but also enable ultra-early prediction of tipping points by fitting and extrapolating their evolutionary trends. Then, we demonstrate the RCDyM method across vari-ous scenarios, showing its outperformance over the state-of-the-art (SOTA) baseline methods. Indeed, we show that the RCDyM method can predict critical transitions associated with equilibria, periodic cycles, and chaotic dynamics. Additionally, we also show that the RCDyM method can predict the occurrence and types of bifurca-tions in real-world CDSs, further highlighting its broad applicability and practical relevance. 

> RESULTS The Framework of RCDyM Method
> Continuous Reservoir Computing.

We consider a nonlinear CDS comprising N variables of the following general form, ˙s(t) = f [s(t), p(t), t ], (1) where s(t) = [s1(t), ..., s N (t)] ⊤ is the N -dimensional (N -D) state of the nonlinear system at time t,

p(t) = [p1(t), ..., p M (t)] ⊤ denotes the M -D time-varying parameter vector, which is assumed to change slowly over time unless otherwise specified, and 

f [s(t), p(t), t ] = {f1[s(t), p(t), t ], ..., f N [s(t), p(t), t ]}⊤

represents the time-varying nonlinear vector field with the external input (parameter vector) p(t). As illustrated in Fig. 1 A, the classical RC framework typically consists of three main components: the input layer, the hidden layer (reservoir), and the output layer. Initially, the input layer embeds the observational data 

s(t) of the system (1) into a higher-dimensional reservoir network via the input matrix Win . Then, the hidden state 

r(t) within the reservoir network evolves according to the following continuous-time, controlled dynamics with the input s(t): ˙r(t) = γ{− r(t) + tanh[ Ar (t) + Win s(t) + br ]}, (2) where γ is the time scale constant, A represents the ad-jacency matrix of the dimension n × n, Win denotes the input matrix of the dimension n×N , and br is the dynam-ical bias term with the dimension n × 1. It is important to note that the matrices A and Win are randomly gen-erated and remain fixed throughout the training process. The only trained module is the output layer, typically a linear transformation via the output matrix Wout of the dimension N × n along with an N -D bias term bs, which maps the hidden state space back to the original state space: ˆs(t) = Wout r(t) + bs. (3) Notably, the output layer can be trained using the ridge regression, yielding the closed form of the Wout and bs.During this training process, the loss function: 

L =

Z

> t

∥ˆs(t) − s(t)∥2 dt + λ(∥Wout ∥2 + ∥bs∥2) (4) is minimized. Here, ∥ · ∥ denotes the standard 2-norm, corresponding to the l2 regularization, and λ is a positive regularization coefficient. In practice, the sum of pre-dictive errors at discrete observational points is used as an approximation for the integral term in the loss func-tion (4). Moreover, additional details on classical RC technique can be found in Section 2.A of the Supporting Information. After training, the state of the underlying CDS can be predicted using the Eqs. (2) and (3). By substituting s

with ˆ s in the controlled RC (2), an autonomous high-dimensional reservoir dynamical system is obtained, de-scribed by the following autonomous dynamical system: ˙r(t) = γ{− r(t) + tanh[ ˜Ar (t) + ˜b]}, (5) where, for notational simplicity, ˜A := A + Win Wout and ˜b := Win bs + br .3EWS Training (2) MFM: Propositon 2 (3) MLE: Propositon 3 (1) DEJ: the dominant eigenvalue of at the equilibrium High Resilience Low Resilience Critical Transition    

> Input Layer Hidden Layer Output Layer Autonomous RC Three typical measures as
> Period Chaos
> MFM MLE 10

A BC  

> Real Tipping Point Observed Data Lead Time RC Warm up Time 012RCDyM Warning Period
> Variable
> +
> DEJ 0Irreversible By QR Decomposition By Monodromy Matrix
> DEJ Propositon 1 Sliding window Regression Curve Predicted Trend
> Ultra-Early Predicted Tipping Point

FIG. 1. Schematic diagram for the proposed RCDyM method. (A) The basic structure of RC consists of the input layer, the hidden layer, and the output layer. The continuous-time, autonomous RC is obtained by replacing the input with the predicted state using the learned RC. ( B) Three RCDyMs are depicted with the application scenarios for the tipping point prediction. (C) An illustrative example of tipping point prediction using the DEJ measure, one of the RCDyMs: Utilizing trend analysis for ultra-early prediction of tipping points. 

Three Typical Dynamical Measures 

As shown in Fig. 1 B, to predict the critical transition, we use three typical dynamical measures for analyzing RC in the autonomous system (5). First, the dominant eigenvalue of the Jacobian ma-trix (DEJ) at a system’s equilibrium is a representative measure used in the bifurcation analysis, providing theo-retical insights for EWS of critical transitions. Although the DEJ of system (1) cannot be directly obtained from the observational data, our analytical arguments demon-strate that the DEJ of the RC dynamics, as described in system (5), offers a robust approximation of the DEJ for the original system (see Proposition 1). Consequently, the stability of the original system can be inferred by evaluating the DEJ of system (5) at its equilibrium. To locate the equilibrium of the high-dimensional system (5), we apply the multivariate Newton’s method based on the estimated Jacobian matrix, utilizing the Python’s “fsolve” function (detailed in Methods section). 

Proposition 1 Denote by Jr (r∗) the Jacobian matrix of system (5) at the equilibrium r∗:

Jr (r∗) = γ{− I + diag[1 − tanh 2( ˜Ar ∗ + ˜b)] ˜A}. (6) 

Suppose that the state s of system (1) satisfies s =

Wout r + bs, and that the dominant eigenvector v1 of Jr

is not in the null space of Wout , i.e., Wout v1̸ = 0 . Then, the dominant eigenvalue λDEJ of Jr is equal to ˆλDEJ ,where ˆλDEJ is the DEJ of the original system (1) .

Additionally, the maximum Floquet multiplier (MFM) [32] is another crucial measure for evaluating the stability of the periodic orbits. Similar to the DEJ, the stability of periodic orbits in the original system can be estimated by calculating the MFM of the high-dimensional dynam-ics in system (5). Here, we propose an automatic method for detecting periodicity based on the autocorrelation co-efficient and error analysis (detailed in Methods section). Furthermore, the maximum Lyapunov exponent (MLE) is an established measure for quantifying any orbit in-cluding chaotic dynamics of a nonlinear system. Actu-ally, the MLE of system (5) can be effectively used to 4estimate the MLE of the original system (1), a relation-ship that has been empirically validated in earlier studies [33]. Building on Proposition 1, we present the follow-ing Propositions 2 and 3 for estimating the MFM and the MLE, respectively, of the original system (1) by an-alyzing the high-dimensional RC in (5). Complete argu-ments for demonstrating these propositions are provided in Supporting Information Section 1. 

Proposition 2 Denote by Tp the period of system (1) 

and by Φ(Tp) the Monodromy matrix of system (5) .Here, the matrix Φ obeys the following differential equa-tion: 

˙Φ(t) = Jr [r(t)] Φ(t), Φ(0) = I,

where Jr is the Jacobian matrix defined in (6) but along the trajectory r(t). If the state s of system (1) satisfies 

s = Wout r+bs, and the dominant eigenvector v1 of Jr is not in the null space of Wout , i.e., Wout v1̸ = 0 , then the dominant eigenvalue λMFM of Φ(Tp) is equal to ˆλMFM ,where ˆλMFM is the MFM of the original system (1) .

Proposition 3 Denote by λMLE the MLE of system (5) .Here, we use the QR decomposition method [34] to com-pute λMLE (detailed in Methods section). If the state s of system (1) satisfies s = Wout r + bs, and the dominant eigenvector v1 of Jr is not in the null space of Wout ,i.e., Wout v1̸ = 0 , then λMLE = ˆλMLE , where ˆλMLE is the MLE of system (1) .

> Ultra-Early Prediction of Tipping Points

To achieve online and ultra-early prediction of tip-ping points, we adopt a sliding window strategy for the real-time computation of dynamical measures. As illus-trated in Fig. 1 C, we utilize a data window of length d

in each iteration to estimate the output matrix Wout ,and then we obtain the corresponding autonomous RC in (5). Then, we compute dynamical measures based on the autonomous RC and utilize each of them as an EWS. The timestamp for the measure is assigned based on the midpoint time within the window, i.e., the timestamp for the i-th measure is 12 (ti + ti+d). By employing a sliding window with a step length of k during each iteration, our method generates time-varying dynamical measures (red scatter points in Fig. 1 C). Subsequently, we perform a regression analysis to fit the trend of the measures, as depicted by the blue solid line and the red dashed line in Fig. 1 C. In our work, we employ refined polynomial fitting of a relatively lower order to capture the trend of the measures (see Supporting Information Section 2.D for details). Clearly, the estimated measures can them-selves serve as novel EWSs for early warning. When these measures exhibit trend-like patterns that are readily fit-table, the RCDyM method enables quantitative predic-tion well before the onset of critical transitions, thereby facilitating ultra-early prediction, and the strict defini-tion of ultra-early prediction is provided in Definition I. Specifically, we introduce a positive threshold ϵ deter-mined by noise disturbances and other related factors. For the DEJ measure, if the real part of the DEJ at an equilibrium increases beyond −ϵ, it indicates that the system may tend to lose its resilience and is prone to sig-nificant and potentially irreversible shifts (see the warn-ing period in Fig. 1 C). Notably, critical transitions are not always induced prematurely by noise or other factors. Thus, the time at which the DEJ curve reaches the criti-cal threshold 0 remains the most fundamental prediction target, as shown by the red triangle in Fig. 1 C. Anal-ogously, for the MFM measure, if the real part exceeds 1 − ϵ, the system’s periodic orbit is considered to be near a tipping point. And, if the MLE in a chaotic system de-creases below ϵ, this suggests a potential transition from chaos to other ordered dynamical behaviors. In addition, as a complement to the current version of the continuous-time RCDyM method, we also provide a discrete-time version in Supporting Information Section 2.B, and discuss the relationship between these two ver-sions in Supporting Information Section 2.C. Moreover, the ability of the RC model to capture dynamics ensures that the choice of hyperparameters aligns with those typ-ically used in conventional RC forecasting tasks. There-fore, we can further refine the selection of appropriate RC hyperparameters guided by the predictive performance of reservoir computing (see Methods section and Support-ing Information Section 4 for more details). To validate the effectiveness and robustness of our framework, we first conduct comparative analysis between the RCDyM method and those baseline methods in Table I, and then we perform a series of experiments on datasets from both simulated and real-world systems. 

> Validation in Classical Dynamical Systems
> Classical Bifurcation Models

We begin by validating our method on four different, well-established bifurcation systems, i.e., fold, period-doubling, pitchfork, and Hopf bifurcations. The corre-sponding dynamical equations and bifurcation points for these models are presented in Table II. To increase the realism of the experimental setup, we introduce a time-varying parameter p(t), which traverses the bifurcation point of the parameter. Furthermore, as shown in Ta-ble II, we incorporate the Gaussian white noise into the state variable s(t) in continuous-time systems, with the noise being zero mean and deviation σn = ωζs , where 

ω represents the noise intensity, set to a default value of 0.01, and ζ is a random variable drawn from a standard normal distribution. For the discrete bifurcation systems, we generate ex-perimental time series with T = 20 , 000 data points, where the time-varying parameter pi is defined as pi =5B Fold Pitchfork Hopf Line “ Period-doubling Variable Variable Ground truth RCDyM (GT) RCDyM (GT) 0.4 0.8 1.2 1011.0 0.8 0.9 222111110Time Variable RCDyM (GT) 0 5000 10000 15000 20000 0.5 0.0 0.5 1000AVariable RCDyM (GT) 1350.6 0.8 1.0 Time 0 5000 10000 15000 20000    

> Period-doubling Pitchfork Hopf GT (DEJ) DEJ Fold
> Regression curve
> Predicted trend Real tipping point Warning period
> Legend Ⅰ
> The rest same as Legend Ⅰ The rest same as Legend Ⅰ
> RCDyM indicator Ultra-early predicted tipping point

C        

> Fixed point Limit circle Period-2 Period-4 Period-8 chaos Type Type Time Time Variable RCDyM (GT) RCDyM (GT) 01210.8 0.6 0.4 010000 20000 30000 40000 50000 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.0 0.6 0.2
> ①②
> GT (MFM) MFM
> Variable

D             

> Fixed point Chaotic attractor Fixed point Chaotic attractor
> MLE GT (MLE) Variable  Variable RCDyM (GT) RCDyM (GT) 020 20 75 50 25 025 05000 10000 15000 20000 05000 10000 15000 20000 05000 10000 15000 20000 011.4 1.0 0.6 ①②
> ”

FIG. 2. Tipping points prediction for representative continuous/discrete-time dynamical systems, including four bifurcation systems and two chaotic systems. (A) Ultra-early prediction of tipping points in systems with different bifurcations, viz., fold, period-doubling, pitchfork, and Hopf bifurcations. The time interval ∆ t was set to 0.1 for pitchfork bifurcation and 0.05 for Hopf bifurcation. For each experiment, the early-warning parameter ϵ is taken as 15% of the total DEJ measure range. ( B) The estimated DEJ measures using the RCDyM method and the ground truth (GT) calculated directly using the original system equations are distributed around the line y = x. ( C) Predicting the critical transition from a limit cycle to an equilibrium in the Hopf bifurcation system, as well as the critical transitions from period-4 to period-2 and period-8 dynamics in the system governed by the Logistic map. ( D) Predicting the critical transitions from an equilibrium to chaos and from chaos to an equilibrium in the Lorenz63 system.  

> ki T

+ b, for i = 0 , 1, ..., T − 1. Similarly, for the contin-uous systems, we sample T data points at equidistant intervals of ∆ t, with the time-varying parameter set as 

p(t) = kt T ∆t + b. To ensure the uniformity in exposition, the indices of the data points are consistently used as the proxies for time points. The parameter pair ( k, b ) is set as follows for different bifurcation experiment: (1 , 1) for the fold bifurcation, (1 .65 , −0.50) for the pitchfork bifur-cation, (0 .15 , 0.25) for the period-doubling bifurcation, and ( −2, 2.5) for the Hopf bifurcation. Next, we apply the discrete-time RCDyM method to compute the DEJ measures for the experiments of the fold and the period-doubling bifurcations, and the continuous-time RCDyM for the experiments of the pitchfork and the Hopf bifurcations. The experimen-tal results are displayed in Fig. 2 A, utilizing dual y-axis plots. In these plots, the left y-axis represents the vari-able s, while the right y-axis shows the DEJ measure alongside the corresponding ground truth (GT). It is evi-dent that our method effectively provides ultra-early pre-dictions of the tipping points. The ground-truth DEJ values, computed through the actual system equations, are depicted as black dots in Fig. 2 A, and the corre-lation between the RCDyM and the GT is shown in Fig.2 B. Clearly, the estimated DEJ follows a growth trend closely aligned with the GT, and both approach the tipping point almost simultaneously. This indicates that our method successfully captures the underlying dy-namical information, even in the presence of a certain strength of noise. Furthermore, in some dynamical sys-tems, ultra-early predicted tipping points may exhibit a slight temporal lag relative to the real tipping points, pri-marily due to noise-induced premature transitions prior to the bifurcation parameter threshold. By calibrating the value of ϵ to align with the noise intensity, we accu-rately map the warning period for true tipping events. To further investigate the performance of RCDyM in ultra-early prediction tasks, we conduct a supplementary ex-perimental analysis in Supporting Information Section 5.C. Our method can further identify several classical types of bifurcations. Specifically, as shown in the period-doubling bifurcation experiment in Fig. 2 A, the imag-inary part of the DEJ, denoted as Im(DEJ), is zero, while the real part of the DEJ, denoted as Re(DEJ), converges to −1, which is the typical feature of a period-doubling bifurcation. In the Hopf bifurcation experi-ment, Re(DEJ) approaches 0, while Im(DEJ) remains 6nonzero. In the fold and the pitchfork bifurcation exper-iments, for the discrete-time system, Re(DEJ) converges to 1 and Im(DEJ) equals zero. And for the continuous-time system, Re(DEJ) tends toward 0 and Im(DEJ) re-mains zero. Detailed discussion and experimental results are provided in Section 5.B of the Supporting Informa-tion. The results show that the RCDyM method can effectively track both the real and imaginary parts of the dominant eigenvalue over time, allowing for the identifi-cation of several fundamental bifurcation types. 

Periodic and Chaotic Systems 

We begin by investigating the critical transition from the limit cycle to the equilibrium in the Hopf bifur-cation system, where p(t) = −2.3 × tT ∆t + 2. Using the continuous-time RCDyM method, we compute both the DEJ and the MFM, as shown in the upper part of Fig. 2 C. The results demonstrate that the MFM measure effectively estimates the stability of periodic orbits. As the system approaches the critical transition, the modu-lus of the MFM measure converges to 1, thereby facili-tating the prediction of the tipping point. Furthermore, the DEJ measure gradually transitions from positive val-ues toward zero, indicating that our method successfully captures the process in which the potential equilibrium point shifts from instability to stability, thus enabling the prediction of critical transitions. Next, we consider a discrete-time system governed by the Logistic map, as shown in Eq. (9). Here, we set 

pi = 0.13 iT + 3 .44 with T = 50 , 000 and i = 0 , 1, ..., T − 1to generate the time series data and compute the MFM measure using the discrete-time RCDyM method. As illustrated in the lower part of Fig. 2 C, our method ef-fectively predicts the critical transitions, including the bifurcation from period-4 to period-2 dynamics (on the left side) and the transition to chaos (on the right side). Strictly speaking, as the parameter p increases, the sys-tem should initially undergo a transition from period-4 to period-8 dynamics, followed by a gradual shift to period-16 dynamics, eventually leading to chaos. However, since the transition from period-8 to chaos occurs over a very short range (less than the window length d), we thus approximate this as a direct transition from period-4 to chaos. We now turn our attention to a more complex chaotic Lorenz63 system [35], see system in (10). As shown in the upper part of Fig. 2 D, we set p(t) = 22 × tT ∆t + 2, ∆t = 0 .01, and ω = 0 .001 to generate the experimen-tal data, capturing the transition from an equilibrium to chaos. It is evident that our method effectively captures EWSs preceding the tipping point. Additionally, we set 

p(t) = −30 × tT ∆t + 50 to generate the experimental data representing the transition from chaos to an equilibrium in a reverse direction, as illustrated in the lower part of Fig. 2 D. The results indicate that our method accu-rately estimates the changes in the MLE of the system as A            

> BSpace Space Time RCDyM RCDyM Time 02500 5000 7500 10000 12500 15000 17500 20000 2.5 0.0 2.5 10 010 10 010 2.5 0.0 2.5 20000 040000 60000 80000 100000 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.10 0.05 0.0800 0.0775 35 34
> 10 50510
> 3131
> Parameter RC-para (no parameter) 32nd trajectory of KS |MFM| KS system data Regression curve
> Predicted trend Tipping point Tipping point MLE

FIG. 3. Tipping points prediction for the KS sys-tem. (A) and ( B) illustrate the predicted transitions in the Kuramoto-Sivashinsky (KS) system: from periodic behavior to chaotic behavior, and from chaotic behavior to periodic behavior, respectively. Here, RC-para (no parameter) refers to the tipping point prediction directly through the RC ex-trapolation prediction, and the green dashed line illustrates the change in system parameters. 

the time-varying parameter p(t) approaches the critical threshold, aligning closely with the GT (i.e., using the MLE estimates based on the original equations). At the critical threshold, the true MLE exhibits a sudden tran-sition from a positive value to zero, reflecting the inher-ent dynamical properties of system (10). Nevertheless, we observe a reduction in the level of chaos before the tipping point, suggesting the need of selecting a larger warning threshold ϵ (e.g., 0.8) to anticipate such tipping events in advance. This phenomenon is common in crit-ical transitions from chaos to other stationary behavior. 

The Kuramoto-Sivashinsky System 

We next investigate the well-known Kuramoto-Sivashinsky (KS) system which is governed by a partial differential equation in (11) and exhibits spatiotempo-ral chaos [36, 37]. To validate the effectiveness of our method, we set L = 2 π, p(t) = 0 .0056 × tT ∆t + 0 .076, 

T = 20 , 000, ∆ t = 0 .02, and ω = 10 −4. We use a spatial discretization of 64 points to generate the exper-imental time series data. Under these conditions, the system undergoes a transition from periodic dynamics to chaos [38], with the bifurcation point occurring at ap-proximately p⋆ ≈ 0.08. As shown in Fig. 3 A, our RCDyM method using the MFM effectively predicts this critical 7transition. It is noted that the existing RC-para base-line methods [29–31] predict tipping points by feeding system parameters into the model and then forecasting future states. However, in many practical situations, the parameter information is often unavailable. Thus, we use a modified baseline method, termed RC-para (no param-eter ), which is trained exclusively on pre-tipping obser-vational data without incorporating external parameters. Consequently, the brown dashed lines in Fig. 3 A repre-sent state predictions generated by this modified method. Clearly, although the RC-para (no parameter) baseline effectively captures periodic patterns, it fails to predict tipping-point transitions when compared to our method under a fair and comparable configuration. Furthermore, the spatial domain size L is also a critical bifurcation parameter [39]. In this case, the KS system exhibits highly complex chaotic behavior, necessitating an increased quantity of observational data to train the RC for learning the MLE of the original system. Here, we apply a stepwise decrease to L, as depicted by the green dashed line in the lower panel of Fig. 3 B, where each step contains 10 , 000 data points. We then set ∆ t = 0 .25, 

p = 1, and ω = 10 −4 to generate the experimental time series data. Under these conditions, the system tran-sits from chaos to periodic behavior, with the bifurca-tion occurring at approximately L⋆ ≈ 33 .7. As shown in Fig. 3 B, the MLE measure reveals patterns, akin to those in Fig. 2 D. Thus, by selecting an appropriate threshold ϵ

(e.g., 0.06), we can effectively predict this critical transi-tion. As illustrated by the brown dashed lines in Fig. 3 B,the RC-para (no parameter) baseline method again fails to anticipate the tipping point where the system reverts to periodic dynamics. 

> Robustness of the RCDyM Method
> Role of Noise

The incorporation of the appropriate noise is crucial for accurately modeling local dynamics near the equilib-rium. Without noise, the system remains perpetually in a state of equilibrium, rendering all tipping point predic-tion methods ineffective. Conversely, the excessive noise can obscure the intrinsic dynamics of the system, com-plicating the extraction of meaningful information from the observational time series data for the tipping point prediction. To investigate the impact of noise on various meth-ods, we first assess the robustness of discrete bifurca-tion systems via varying the noise strengths ω. We em-ploy the period-doubling bifurcation system as a test case to compare the performance of our RCDyM method against several baselines: Variance, lag-1 autocorrelation (Lag-1 AC) [11], dynamical eigenvalue (DEV) [16], and deep learning (DL) [15]. As illustrated in Fig. 4 A, com-pared to Variance and DL indicators, our method ex-hibits the significant capability and the invariant scale property for accurately and robustly predicting critical transitions across various noise intensities. Additionally, compared to DEV and Lag-1 AC indicators, our method demonstrates the enhanced stability and effectively esti-mates the ground-truth DEJ of the original system. No-tably, our method allows for a more precise estimation of the equilibrium by numerically solving the learned au-tonomous system (5), as opposed to simply selecting the last data point of a data window (which is a standard way used in the DEV method). Furthermore, regression analysis of the proposed RCDyM enables ultra-early pre-diction of tipping points, whereas conventional indicators such as variance and DL lack dynamical interpretabil-ity and well-defined thresholds, thus failing to provide precise prediction of when critical transitions occur. To further substantiate the noise robustness, we present ex-perimental results for the other bifurcation systems in Supporting Information Section 6.A. 

> Ultra-Early Prediction of Tipping Points

By analyzing the trend of the dynamical measures, our method enables ultra-early prediction of tipping points. To further validate this perspective, we define the time interval between the ultra-early prediction time and the critical transition time as the lead time (see Fig. 1 C), and investigate the predictive accuracy of tipping points un-der varying lead times. As shown in Fig. 4 B, we present the relationship between lead time and prediction error of tipping points in four bifurcation systems, and provide the upper bound of lead time for achieving relatively ac-curate ultra-early prediction. From Fig. 4 B, it is evident that once the lead time falls below a certain threshold, the regression curve can be employed to accurately pre-dict tipping points. This lower bound typically emerges at an early stage preceding the critical transition of the system, thereby validating the timeliness of our proposed method in predicting tipping points. In addition, see Supporting Information Section 5.C for more experimen-tal analysis. 

> Influence of Hyperparameters

In this section, we examine the robustness and sensi-tivity of the proposed RCDyM method with respect to key hyperparameters, including the window length d and those hyperparameters in RC. The selection of an appropriate window length d is paramount for the accurate online prediction of tipping points. To assess the robustness of our method with re-spect to d, we estimate the DEJ and the MLE for the Lorenz63 system by changing the values of d. In these experiments, we assume that the system’s parameters within a given window remain approximately constant. The results are displayed in Fig. 4 C as the box plots, where each estimate is derived from 50 experimental tri-8BA

C DE

> Ground truth Prediction

F                                     

> Prediction
> Ground truth RCDyM RCDyM Space Space Time 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 200 10000 8000 6000 4000 2000 0500 1000 2000 3000 4000 0.07 0.05 0.03 0.01 0.01 200 400 800 1600 3200 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 4.7 4.9 5.1 8.8 9.0 9.4 4.80 4.85 4.90 4.95 4.85 4.90 4.95 8.9 9.0 9.1 10 010 10 010 2.5 0.0 2.5 6200 6400 6600 6800 7000 6000 3210321
> DEJ MLE GT (DEJ) GT (MLE)
> MLE GT (MLE)
> Observed data Prediction Ground truth Predicted fixed point Fixed point RCDyM 510 50 100 0.02 0.4 0.2 0.0 0.01 0.00 0.9 0.8 1.0 6000 4000 2000 001000 Time 2000 3000 4000 01000 Time Lead time Prediction error 2000 3000 4000 01000 Time 2000 3000 4000 01000 Time 2000 3000 4000 0.9 0.8 1.0
> Indicators RCDyM Variance DEV

DL 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 0 1000 Time 2000 3000 4000 Lag-1 AC      

> 0.001 0.002 0.005 0.01 0.02 0.05 Ground truth
> Fold Pitchfork Hopf Period-doubling
> Lead time upper bound 9.2

FIG. 4. Robustness demonstration of the RCDyM method. (A) Predicting tipping points in the experiment of period-doubling bifurcation for different noise intensities. (B) Upper bound of the lead time for achieving ultra-early prediction of the tipping points for four bifurcation systems. (C) The estimations of the MLE and the DEJ in the Lorenz63 system for different window length d, compared to the ground-truth values of the DEJ at −0.596 ( p = 10) and the MLE at 0 .91 ( p = 28), respectively. ( D) The estimation of the MLE in the KS system for different n, with the ground-truth value of the MLE at 0.05 (p = 1 and L = 22). ( E) Modeling dynamics near an equilibrium using the observational time series data from the Lorenz63 system. ( F ) Modeling the chaotic behavior of the KS system using the RC under an elevated noise level with ω = 0 .05. 

als. It is seen that the estimation performance of our method becomes increasingly stable as d increases. No-tably, even for small d, our method still accurately esti-mates the DEJ on average. We thus regard that this ro-bustness arises from the method’s ability to capture local dynamics that are critical to system stability. Further-more, since the MLE characterizes the global dynamics of the systems, larger d values are required for the effec-tive training of RC models. Our experiments show that the approach becomes reliable when d exceeds 500. Then, we analyze the impact of RC hyperparameters on the performance of our method, focusing specifically on the effect of n, the reservoir network size (i.e., the number of nodes), on the MLE estimation for the KS sys-tem. We perform 50 trials for each value of n, with the re-sults summarized in the box plots shown in Fig. 4 D. The experiments reveal that small n values lead to the inaccu-rate MLE estimates, whereas increasing n improves the accuracy up to a certain threshold. Beyond this point, further increases provide no substantial improvement and may even lead to performance degradation due to over-fitting. This saturation point highlights that the reser-voir size must be carefully chosen for the optimal per-formance. Furthermore, details on the selection strate-gies for hyperparameters, along with the hyperparameter configurations for all experiments, are provided in Sup-porting Information Section 4. 

Modeling Capability in CDSs 

Another key advantage of our approach lies in its abil-ity to leverage observational data for the accurate mod-eling of unknown CDSs, which is particularly important given the increasing prevalence of high-throughput data. To illustrate this, we carry out the following experiments. We first utilize the Lorenz63 system as a paradigm. To generate the time series data, as shown by the green dashed line in the left panel of Fig. 4 E, we set the sys-tem’s parameters as: ρ = 10 , T = 3000 , ∆t = 0 .005, and 

ω = 0 .001. Despite the presence of the irregular motion near the equilibrium caused by the noise, our method 9effectively learns the local dynamics of the system. To validate this, we employ the trained RC model to per-form multi-step extrapolation predictions, using the last observed data point as the initial value. The trajectory is then simulated using the system’s dynamical equations with ω = 0 as the GT. As demonstrated in the right panel of Fig. 4 E, our method shows a high degree of congruence with the ground-truth trajectory, accurately predicting both the position of the equilibrium and the dominant eigenvalue at that point. Furthermore, in practical ap-plications, we assume that variations in environmental parameters within a given data window are typically mi-nor, ensuring that the local dynamics remain largely un-changed. Our method remains capable of extracting dy-namical measures under these constraints, as confirmed by the experiments presented in our work. In addition, under increased noise levels, we explore the application of RC to model the KS system, estimat-ing its MLE. The experimental time series data is gener-ated following the configuration depicted in Fig. 4 E, with the first 6000 data points used as the training set. Figure 4F illustrates the results of the extrapolation predictions over 1000 time steps. Typically, successfully capturing the relatively long-term dynamics in chaotic systems is particularly challenging, especially in the presence of sig-nificant process noise, but our method is still capable of successfully capturing the relatively long-term dynamics of the system, producing a smooth, noise-free forecast while maintaining consistency with the MLE of the orig-inal system. 

> Applications to Real-World Datasets
> Critical Transitions in Eight Real-World Systems

Here, we apply our framework of the RCDyM method to eight real-world datasets, each exhibiting critical tran-sitions. These datasets include: a physical experiment on voice production during phonation onset [16]; sedimen-tary archives capturing periods of anoxia in the eastern Mediterranean region [40]; cytosolic adenosine triphos-phate (ATP) changes in live plants under progressively hypoxic conditions [41]; transitions towards thermoa-coustic instability in a horizontal Rijke tube which is a prototypical thermoacoustic system [42]; the frequency of bus voltage prior to power grid collapse [43]; the abun-dance of calcium carbonate (CaCO 3) at the end of green-house Earth [44]; cyanobacteria microcosm experiment under light stress [45]; and Cariaco Basin 2000 Deglacial 14C and Grey Scale Data [46]. Each of these datasets captures a critical transition triggered by environmental changes. Accurately predicting such transitions is no-tably challenging due to the nonlinearity and uncertainty inherent in real-world environments. To facilitate data processing, we set the initial time of each experimental dataset to zero. We then apply our RCDyM method to predict tipping points within these systems, with the results illustrated in Fig. 5. Both the discrete and continuous RCDyM methods provide signif-icant early warnings prior to the occurrence of tipping points (see Supporting Information Section 5.F for con-tinuous RCDyM results). In particular, Figures. 5 A to 5D demonstrate the robustness and the high performance of our method, likely due to the low levels of interference in the real-world data. However, in Figs. 5 I to 5 L, the systems may be exposed to persistent, high-intensity dis-turbances, resulting in highly irregular observations. In such cases, existing methods often struggle to deliver sta-ble predictions. Nonetheless, our approach outperforms SOTA baseline methods, with detailed comparisons pro-vided in Supporting Information Section 6.B. Moreover, for experiments depicted in Figs. 5 I to 5 L,we improve the stability of our method by optimizing hyperparameters and excluding outlier data windows. For more unstable datasets, we recommend selecting a smaller hidden state dimension n for the reservoir com-puting (RC) model and a larger regularization coefficient 

λ. Details on the selection strategies for hyperparam-eters, along with their configurations, can be found in Supporting Information Section 4. Additionally, outlier windows containing significant external disturbances can be omitted. For instance, in Fig. 5 K, data windows in-volving manual interventions are excluded, which further enhances the stability of our method. The same proce-dures are applied to baseline methods to ensure fair com-parisons. In our previous discussions, the effectiveness of the pro-posed method was qualitatively demonstrated in aspects such as noise robustness, nonlinear processing capabil-ity, and ultra-early prediction. To complement this, we introduce a new quantitative metric to evaluate different approaches from the perspective of early-warning success rates for these eight real-world datasets. As shown in Fig. 5, we select a time interval [ tw, t p] near the tipping point, which is defined as the ground truth of the warn-ing region and labeled as 1, while the remaining regions are labeled as 0. Notably, a better prediction should exhibit values within [ tw, t p] that are closer to the criti-cal threshold (e.g., RCDyM) or demonstrate larger mag-nitudes (e.g., variance) than those outside the warning region. This setup corresponds to a binary classification task for early-warning signals, allowing us to plot receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves for different meth-ods by varying the critical threshold (e.g., ϵ for RCDyM). As seen in Figs. 5 E-5 H and 5 M -5 P , our method achieves the highest or near-highest area under the curve (AUC) across all eight experiments, demonstrating its superior and robust performance from the perspective of metric consistency in early-warning tasks. Upon comparing AUC scores across different methods, we observe that the DL approach underperforms in out-of-distribution settings, indicating the need for further refinement. Similarly, the DEV method exhibits insta-bility in more complex environments. In contrast, tra-ditional statistical methods, such as variance and lag-10 Subglottal pressure, kPa RCDyM RCDyM Time (s) Mo (ppm) RCDyM  Fluorescence 

Sedimentary Archive 

Voice Production ratio, % Time (s) Pressure RCDyM 

ATP dynamics 

Thermoacoustic transition Time (s) ABCDTime ( 1e3 years)   

> RCDyM (1.00 )Variance ( 1.00 )Lag-1 AC ( 1.00 )Skewness (0.79) DEV ( 0.99 )DL (0.51)
> RCDyM (1.00 )Variance ( 0.99 )Lag-1 AC ( 1.00 )Skewness (0.90) DEV (0.94) DL (0.72) True positive kPa Frequency

Power grid failure 

> CaCO 3, % Light attention

p1 p2 p3 p6 Gray scale Time (day) Time ( 1e6 years) IJKL

Greenhouse Earth 

Cyanobacteria population 

Cariaco Basin climate Time ( 1e3 years) Time (s) p4 p5 RCDyM RCDyM RCDyM RCDyM  Hz False positive False positive True positive True positive True positive EFGHTrue positive True positive True positive True positive MNOP1.0 0.5 1.0 0.9 0.8 100 50 0.95 1.00 0.90 85 80 75 1.0 0.9 0.1 0.0 1.00 0.98 0.96 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0 1 2 3 4 5 60.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 70.5 0.0 1.0 0.9 0.8 50 01.0 0.5 0.8 1.0 0.8 1.0 150 100 200 180 0 100 200 300 400 500 0 1 2 3 4 5 60 5 10 15 20 25 0 2 4 6 8 10 1.00 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00 1.00 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00 1.00 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00 1.00 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.00 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00 0.0 0.5 1.0 False positive 0.0 0.5 1.0 False positive 0.0 0.5 1.0 False positive 0.0 0.5 1.0 False positive 0.0 0.5 1.0 False positive 0.0 0.5 1.0 False positive 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.00 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00 1.00 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00 1.00 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00       

> RCDyM (0.96 )Variance ( 0.98 )Lag-1 AC ( 0.95 )Skewness (0.54) DEV (0.73) DL (0.71)
> RCDyM (0.82 )Variance (0.29) Lag-1 AC ( 0.80 )Skewness (0.54) DEV ( 0.81 )DL (0.34)
> RCDyM (0.96 )Variance (0.88) Lag-1 AC ( 0.98 )Skewness (0.46) DEV (0.76) DL (0.22)
> RCDyM (0.95 )Variance ( 0.92 )Lag-1 AC (0.84) Skewness (0.52) DEV (0 .73) DL (0.11)
> RCDyM (1.00 )Variance (0.82) Lag-1 AC ( 1.00 )Skewness (0.95) DEV (0.98) DL (0.51)
> RCDyM (0.97 )Variance ( 0.99 )Lag-1 AC (0.78) Skewness (0.15) DEV (0.80) DL (0.34)

Regression curve Predicted trend y = 1.0 RCDyM The region near the tipping point for the ROC curve 

FIG. 5. Performance of the RCDyM method in predicting tipping points across eight real-world datasets. 

(A)-( H) The experimental results for voice production, sedimentary archives, APT dynamics, and thermoacoustic transitions. (I)-( P ) The experimental results for power grid failure, greenhouse Earth conditions, cyanobacteria population dynamics, and the Cariaco Basin climate, respectively. Here, we denote the time interval corresponding to the top 30% of indicators closest to the tipping point as [ tw , t p] and label this segment as 1, while all other regions are labeled 0. Thus, we obtain the ROC curve and AUC value, which are used to quantitatively evaluate the performance of our method in comparison to baseline approaches. 

1 AC, show relatively stable AUC performance. How-ever, these methods occasionally fail, as seen with vari-ance in the Greenhouse Earth experiment and lag-1 AC in the thermoacoustic transition experiment. And the skewness indicator is more commonly used in bistable or multistable systems and is widely observed in real-world scenarios; however, it still exhibits limitations in gener-ality and robustness compared to the RCDyM approach. Additionally, our approach offers greater interpretability compared to statistical methods (e.g., variance and lag-1 AC) and DL methods, making it easier to select an ap-propriate threshold ϵ for ultra-early prediction of tipping points. In summary, we validate the effectiveness and ro-bustness of our approach on complex real-world datasets through both qualitative and quantitative analyses. 

Potential Collapse of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation 

The Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) is a crucial oceanic current system in the At-lantic Ocean, playing a significant role in regulating the global climate and supporting the marine ecosystems. As depicted by the dashed curve in Fig. 6 A, the AMOC transports warm, saline surface waters northward while moving colder, deeper waters southward. However, re-cent studies suggest that the AMOC is undergoing a critical transition from its current strong mode to a weaker mode [47, 48], which could have far-reaching con-sequences for the global climate and Earth system. To evaluate the efficacy of our approach, we select two key observational variables related to the AMOC: the mean salinity in a specific region of the northern North 11 A B    

> RCDyM (DEJ indicator) Regression line (optimistic) Predicted trend (optimistic) Regression line (pessimistic) Predicted trend (pessimistic) Critical transition Predicted tipping point 2043 2064
> Salinity index region
> SST index region Southward current Northward current
> RCDyM
> FIG. 6. Predicting the tipping point of the AMOC using the RCDyM method. (A) The simplified schematic of the AMOC on an Earth map, with a color bar representing salinity levels in the ocean from 300 meters depth to the surface, covering the first four months of 2024. ( B) The upper panel displays the mean salinity and SST indices within the quadrilateral region highlighted in subfigure A, spanning the period from January 1900 to April 2024. The lower panel presents the EWS calculated using the continuous RCDyM method, where the red line represents the regression results using all the RCDyMs shown in the subfigure, while the blue line represents the regression results based on indicators from 1996 onward.

Atlantic (54–62 °N, 26–62 °W) and the mean sea surface temperature (SST) of the subpolar gyre region (46–61 °N, 20–55 °W). As shown in the upper panel of Fig. 6 B, the salinity index reflects the mean salinity from 300 meters depth to the ocean surface, while the SST variable is defined as the difference between the mean temperature within the SST index region and the global oceanic mean temperature. We input SST and salinity as two-dimensional vari-ables into the continuous-time RCDyM method to pre-dict potential tipping points of the AMOC, with the cor-responding results shown in the lower panel of Fig. 6 B.Here, we select appropriate RC hyperparameters to min-imize the extrapolation prediction error edyn of Equa-tion (8), thereby improving the reliability of the tipping point predictions. The RCDyM shows a steady upward trend over time, approaching a critical threshold, which surprisingly aligns with the findings of previous studies [47, 49] (see Section 6.C of the Supporting Information for a further comparative analysis of RCDyM with these baseline methods). Notably, our method suggests that, if the current trend persists, a critical transition in the AMOC may occur around the year 2064, as indicated by the red line in the lower panel of Fig. 6 B. Furthermore, we observe an accelerated growth rate of the RCDyM af-ter 1996, which can likely be attributed to the intensifica-tion of factors such as industrial activities, global warm-ing, and ice sheet melting. Following this trend, the crit-ical transition of the AMOC is expected to occur before the middle of this century, as indicated by the blue line in Fig. 6 B. It should be noted that the aforementioned conclusions were obtained under the condition that the dynamical index reached a threshold of zero. However, if the AMOC involves a noise-induced tipping process near the tipping point, the critical transition might oc-cur earlier due to substantial perturbations. Therefore, it is crucial to continuously monitor the development of the AMOC and take effective measures to promptly reverse the trend toward its potential catastrophic collapse. 

> CONCLUDING REMARKS

In this article, we introduced the RCDyM, a data-driven and machine-learning framework for predicting tipping points. The RCDyM framework employs a sliding window strategy to analyze local system dynamics from the observational time series data without any knowl-edge of the underlying CDSs. By examining the learned RC’s dynamics, we derive several key dynamical mea-sures, i.e., DEJ, MFM, and MFE, that serve as EWSs for critical transitions. The effectiveness and robustness of our method were validated through experiments on four bifurcation systems, three chaotic systems, and nine real-world datasets, demonstrating superior predictive performance and dynamical interpretability compared to SOTA baselines. Notably, we provide a quantitative pre-diction and early warning analysis of a potential criti-cal transition in an important climate system (AMOC), demonstrating that our framework enables ultra-early prediction of critical transitions through trend analysis of the RCDyMs. Unlike conventional approaches, the RCDyM frame-work integrates RC modeling and dynamical systems theory, enabling more comprehensive extraction of three interpretable indicators from latent unknown CDSs di-rectly from observed data. In addition to the commonly used DEJ measure, we extend our analysis by introduc-ing two additional indicators: the MFM for periodic sys-tems and the MLE for chaotic systems. Mathematically, 12 these three measures are closely related. Specifically, DEJ and MFM can be regarded as degenerate forms of the MLE—at equilibrium points and limit cycles, respec-tively. Therefore, these three dynamical measures are fundamentally unified in their purpose: to quantify the local sensitivity and stability of dynamical systems in response to infinitesimal perturbations. These measures significantly enhance the versatility of our framework, al-lowing it to predict critical transitions in a wider variety of complex dynamics. In addition, in practical applica-tions, the extrapolation predictive metrics (e.g., edyn in Eq. (8)) can guide us in selecting appropriate RC hyper-parameters for accurate prediction of tipping points, thus demonstrating the strong operability and practicality of our method. Despite the promising results, there are three main lim-itations that warrant further investigation. First, in the real-world experiments, we primarily focus on using the DEJ measure for fixed-point systems, while the applica-tion of the MFM and the MLE in real-world contexts re-mains underexplored. Second, the RCDyM approach pri-marily focuses on bifurcation-induced tipping due to its stronger dynamical interpretability, while its efficacy for rate-induced tipping requires further validation and the development of a corresponding improved framework. Fi-nally, this work primarily examines the RCDyM method in complex systems with relatively small numbers of vari-ables. An important direction for future research is to extend our framework to networked dynamical systems by leveraging structural information, which will be a key focus of our ongoing work. We foresee broad applications of this framework for tipping point prediction across di-verse real-world complex systems. 

> MATERIALS AND METHODS

In the first part of the Results section, we provided a comprehensive introduction to the RCDyM framework, and the main execution steps are shown in Algorithm 1. In the following section, we provide additional imple-mentation details of the RCDyM method and specify the dynamical models employed in the synthetic experiments of our work. 

> Advantages in Critical Features

By integrating the advanced machine learning tech-nique with the dynamical theory, we introduce a novel and robust RCDyM method with the dynamical inter-pretability. Table I presents a comprehensive comparison of key properties between the proposed method and the existing SOTA methods. The term “Generality” refers to the method’s ability to predict any kind of CDSs solely using the time-series data, without additional informa-tion about the underlying systems such as time-varying parameters. “Pre-tipping” denotes that the method re-

Algorithm 1: Main steps of the RCDyM framework                                 

> Require: Observational time series data {s1, s 2, ..., s T}.
> 1: Set the values of ϵ,d,k, and other RC hyperparameters;
> 2: Adjust the RC hyperparameters to minimize extrapolation prediction error edyn in Eq. (8), then set i= 0;
> 3: Train RC using Eqs. (2)-(4) and data
> {sik +1 ,· · · , s ik +d}from i-th sliding window, and then derive the autonomous RC dynamics (5);
> 4: Calculate i-th dynamical indicator of RC Autonomous dynamics (5), including DEJ (Proposition 1), MFM (Proposition 2), or MLE (Proposition 3);
> 5: If ( i+ 1) k+d≤T, set i=i+ 1 and return to step 3; otherwise, proceed to the next step;
> 6: Predict tipping points via measures form the RCDyM method. First, a critical transition is forecasted when the measures exceed the warning threshold. Then, the potential tipping point can be quantitatively predicted in advance by analyzing the trend of these measures;
> Ensure: Prediction of whether a tipping point is imminent.

lies solely on data from the pre-tipping regime, elimi-nating the need for additional labeled data. “Nonlinear” indicates the model’s capacity to handle potential nonlin-ear dynamics. “Bifurcation types” signifies the method’s ability to identify various prevalent bifurcation types. “Periodic/Chaotic” describes the capability to predict tipping points in systems exhibiting periodic or chaotic behavior. Finally, “Ultra-early prediction” refers to the capability of our RCDyM method to achieve quantitative prediction at a very early stage, well before the onset of critical transitions. And more detailed analyses about these features can be found in Supporting Information Section 2.E. The comparative analysis of these features reveals that the proposed method offers enhanced uni-versality and a broader range of applications. 

> Multivariable Newton’s method for finding equilibria

In computing the DEJ indicator using the RCDyM method (see Proposition 1), we deviate from the base-line method (DEV), which involves randomly select-ing a point for computation. Instead, we first solve for the equilibrium of the learned autonomous dynam-ics (see Eq. (5)) and then compute the DEJ index at this equilibrium. Specifically, we define the function 

g(r) = γ{− r(t) + tanh[ ˜Ar (t) + ˜b]}, and we use the fi-nal state of the controlled RC dynamics (see Eq. (2)) as the initial guessed root r0 of g(r), serving as the starting point of the Newton iteration with the form: 

ri+1 = ri − J−1 

> r

g(ri). The iterations continue until the solution reaches a predefined precision threshold. Since 13 

TABLE I. Comparison of the existing SOTA baselines and the proposed RCDyM method . Here, “Generality” refers to the applicability of the method to arbitrary systems without additional information about the time-varying parameters, “Pre-tipping” indicates whether the method requires data solely from the pre-tipping regime, “Nonlinear” indicates the model’s capacity to handle potential nonlinear dynamics, “Bifurcation types” signifies the method’s ability to identify various prevalent bifurcation types, “Periodic/Chaotic” describes the capability to predict tipping points in systems exhibiting periodic or chaotic behavior, and “Ultra-early prediction” refers to the capability of our RCDyM method to achieve quantitative prediction at a very early stage, well before the onset of critical transitions. Method Reference Generality Pre-tipping Nonlinear Bifurcation types Periodic/Chaotic Ultra-early prediction Classical EWSs Scheffer et al., 2009 [11] " " N/A % % %                                   

> DL Bury et al., 2021 [15] "%N/A "%%
> RC-para1 Patel & Ott, 2022 [30] %""%""
> DEV Grziwotz et al., 2023 [16] ""%"%%
> RC-para2 Panahi et al., 2024 [31] %""%""
> RCDyM This work """"""

Algorithm 2: Automatic Detection of Periodicity Within Time Series Data 

Require: Data s = {s1, s 2, ..., s d}, initial value t = Tmin ,and threshold β. 

> 1:

Let sa = {s1, s 2, ..., s t} and sb = {st+1 , s t+2 , ..., s 2t}. 

> 2:

We compute the correlation coefficient and error associated with sa and sb, denoted as ct and et,respectively.  

> 3:

If ct > β and et < 1 − β, set the output period Tp = t;otherwise, increment t by one and return to Step 1. 

Ensure: The period Tp of the data s.

our method models the local dynamics in the vicinity of equilibrium points, it typically exhibits superior conver-gence properties. 

IDENTIFYING THE PERIOD OF A PERIODIC ORBIT 

In computing the MFM indicator using the RCDyM method (see Proposition 2), we need to automatically recognize period. In practice, the presence of noise and varying sampling frequencies in observational time series data complicates the direct detection of periodic orbit periods through the simple measurement of the state dif-ference between the start and end of the orbit. To fa-cilitate automatic and robust detection of periodic orbit periods from the time series data, we employ autocor-relation coefficients combined with error analysis. The detailed detection procedure is outlined in Algorithm 2. 

CALCULATE MLE USING QR DECOMPOSITION 

In computing the MLE indicator using the RCDyM method (see Proposition 3), we employ the QR decom-position method to calculate the MLE. We randomly gen-erate a non-singular matrix Qini with dimension n × K,and then orthonormalize it as Q0 by performing a QR decomposition Qini = Q0R0. To ensure algorithm stabil-ity and efficiency, we choose an increasing sequence that tends to infinity, denoted as 0 = t0 < t 1 < t 2 < · · · . For any j ∈ { 0, 1, 2, ... }, we have ˙Yj (t) = Jr [Yj (t)] Yj (t), Yj (tj ) = Qj , tj ≤ t ≤ tj+1 ,

(7) and take the QR factorization Yj (tj+1 ) = Qj+1 Rj+1 .Based on this, we estimate the ith Lyapunov exponent as follows: 

λi = lim  

> M→∞

1

tM

log 



> M

Y

> j=1

(Rj )ii 

 , 1 ≤ i ≤ K. 

Therefore, we obtain the maximum Lyapunov exponent as |MLE | = λ1. In practical applications, M is typically chosen as a large finite value for approximate computa-tion. Furthermore, when solely calculating the MLE, i.e., when K equals 1, the aforementioned QR decomposition simplifies to the operation of vector norm calculation, thereby enhancing computational efficiency. 

Reservoir Computing Hyperparameter Selection Strategies 

To enhance the application of the proposed RCDyM method, beyond the adjustment of hyperparameters based on historical experience, we can further refine the selection of appropriate RC hyperparameters guided by the predictive performance of reservoir computing. This strategy leverages a fundamental principle: RC with su-perior dynamical prediction capabilities are expected to exhibit heightened tipping point forecasting abilities. Here, we employ the mean squared error (MSE) of one-step predictions as the metric to evaluate the predictive performance of RC. Specifically, when calculating the i-th RCDyM, we utilize the sliding window within the time interval [ ti, t i+d] as the training set, while use the data within the time interval [ ti+d, t i+d+k] as the extrapolated testing set. Subsequently, we calculate the mean of ex-trapolative predictions across all testing set to serve as 14 the metric for assessing the dynamical forecasting per-formance of the RC under specific hyperparameters, de-noted by 

edyn = 1

ndk

> nd

X

> i=0
> i+d+k

X

> j=i+d

[ˆ s(tj ) − s(tj )] 2, (8) where nd represents the number of sliding windows, ˆ s

denotes the dynamical predictions of the RC, d signifies the window length, and k indicates the sliding step size. Finally, we prefer to select the RC hyperparameter that minimize edyn , and the effectiveness of this strategy is validated in Supporting Information Section 4. 

> Definition of “Ultra-Early Prediction”

In our work, the dynamical measures generated by the proposed RCDyM method can not only serve as early-warning signals for critical transitions, but also enable ultra-early prediction of tipping points when trend-like patterns are present, as detailed in Definition I. 

Definition 1 Ultra-Early Prediction of Tipping Points. Consider a dynamical system with a tipping point occurring at time tp. Let M (t) be a dynamical mea-sure (e.g., DEJ) estimated via the RCDyM method using the sliding windows. 1. Early Trend Fitting: At a time tl < t p, an approxi-mating function P (t) is employed to fit the historical se-quence of the measure {M (t) : t < t l}.2. Extrapolation to Threshold: The predicted tipping time ˆtp is estimated by calculating the time at which P (t)

reaches the critical threshold τc (e.g., τc = 0 for the DEJ measure). This prediction is deemed ultra-early if: The measure 

M (t) exhibits a fittable trend pattern as the system ap-proaches tp, which enables the simultaneous achievement of a significantly positive lead time ( tp − tl ≫ 0) and a sufficiently small prediction error ( |tp − ˆtp| → 0). 

> Dynamical Equations Underlying the Experimental Data

This section concisely outlines the dynamical equations underlying the simulation experiments presented in this work. We first consider four bifurcation systems: the cor-responding dynamical equations, bifurcation types, and bifurcation points systematically summarized in Table II. Next, we consider the discrete-time dynamical system, governed by the Logistic map, as: 

si+1 = ps i(1 − si) + ωζs i, (9) where p represents the parameter related to the birth rate, and ω = 0 .003. Then we consider a more complex chaotic Lorenz63 system [35], governed by the following differential equations: ˙x = 10( y − x) + ωζx, 

˙y = px − y − xz + ωζy, 

˙z = xy − 8/3z + ωζz, 

(10) where p is a time-varying parameter and the state variables are s = {x, y, z }. We finally consider the Kuramoto-Sivashinsky (KS) system, governed by the partial differential equation with periodic boundary con-ditions: 

∂ts(x, t ) = − s(x, t )∂xs(x, t ) − ∂xx s(x, t )

− p(t)∂xxxx s(x, t ) + ωζs (x, t ),s(x, t ) = s(x + L, t ),

(11) where s(x, t ) is a real-valued scalar function dependent on both space and time, with x ∈ [−L/ 2, L/ 2] and 

t ∈ [0 , T ∆t]. Here, L represents the spatial domain size, and p(t) is a time-dependent parameter, functioning as the system’s viscosity. This KS system exhibits the spa-tiotemporal chaos, as reported in [36, 37].   

> TABLE II. Dynamical equations and bifurcation values
> p⋆of several bifurcation experiments.

Bifurcation p⋆ Equation Fold 1.82 si+1 = sie0.75 −0.1si − ps 2  

> i
> s2
> i+0 .75 2

+ ωζs i

Period-doubling 0.37 s1,i +1 = 1 − ps 21,i + s2,i + ωζs 1,i 

s2,i +1 = 0 .3s1,i + ωζs 2,i 

Pitchfork 1.19 ˙s(t) = 0 .5 + ps − s3 + ωζs 

Hopf 0 ˙s1(t) = ps 1 − s2 − s1(s21 + s22) + ωζs 1

˙s2(t) = s1 + ps 2 − s2(s21 + s22) + ωζs 2

> DATA, MATERIALS, AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY

All simulated data used in this study were gener-ated using programming simulations based on dynami-cal equations. The sea surface temperature (SST) data are publicly available at https://www.metoffice.gov. uk/hadobs/hadisst , and the ocean salinity data can be downloaded from https://www.metoffice.gov.uk/ hadobs/en4/ . Upon acceptance of the paper, all anal-ysis code and datasets used in this study will be made publicly available on GitHub. 

> ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

X.L. is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62506370), Innovation Re-search Foundation of (NUDT) and Hunan Provincial 15 Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 2026JJ60049). Q.Z. is supported by the National Natural Science Foun-dation of China (Nos. 62406072 and 12171350) and by the STCSM (Nos. 23YF1402500, 21511100200, 22ZR1407300, and 22dz1200502). W.L. is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 11925103) and by the STCSM (Nos. 22JC1402500, 22JC1401402, and 2021SHZDZX0103). 

[1] W. J. Lesterhuis, A. Bosco, M. Millward, M. Millward, M. Small, M. Small, A. K. Nowak, A. K. Nowak, and R. A. Lake, Dynamic versus static biomarkers in can-cer immune checkpoint blockade: unravelling complexity, Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 16 , 264 (2017). [2] I. A. van de Leemput, M. Wichers, A. O. Cramer, D. Borsboom, F. Tuerlinckx, P. Kuppens, E. H. Van Nes, W. Viechtbauer, E. J. Giltay, S. H. Aggen, et al. , Critical slowing down as early warning for the onset and termina-tion of depression, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 , 87 (2014). [3] P. U. Clark, N. G. Pisias, T. F. Stocker, and A. J. Weaver, The role of the thermohaline circulation in abrupt climate change, Nature 415 , 863 (2002). [4] R. M. May, S. A. Levin, and G. Sugihara, Complex sys-tems: Ecology for bankers, Nature 451 , 893 (2008). [5] A. Hastings, K. C. Abbott, K. Cuddington, T. B. Francis, G. Gellner, Y.-C. Lai, A. Y. Morozov, S. V. Petrovskii, K. Scranton, and M. L. Zeeman, Transient phenomena in ecology, Science 361 (2018). [6] D. Centola, J. Becker, D. Brackbill, and A. Baronchelli, Experimental evidence for tipping points in social con-vention, Science 360 , 1116 (2018). [7] T. M. Lenton, J. Rockstr¨ om, O. Gaffney, S. Rahmstorf, K. Richardson, W. Steffen, and H. J. Schellnhuber, Cli-mate tipping points—too risky to bet against, Nature 

575 , 592 (2019). [8] V. Dakos, E. H. van Nes, P. D’Odorico, and M. Scheffer, Robustness of variance and autocorrelation as indicators of critical slowing down., Ecology 93 2 , 264 (2012). [9] C. Wissel, A universal law of the characteristic return time near thresholds, Oecologia 65 , 101 (1984). [10] E. H. van Nes and M. Scheffer, Slow recovery from per-turbations as a generic indicator of a nearby catastrophic shift, The American Naturalist 169 , 738 (2007). [11] M. Scheffer, J. Bascompte, W. A. B. Brock, V. A. Brovkin, S. R. Carpenter, V. Dakos, H. Held, E. H. van Nes, M. Rietkerk, and G. Sugihara, Early-warning signals for critical transitions, Nature 461 , 53 (2009). [12] V. Dakos, M. Scheffer, E. H. van Nes, V. A. Brovkin, V. Petoukhov, and H. Held, Slowing down as an early warning signal for abrupt climate change, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105 , 14308 (2008). [13] S. R. Carpenter and W. A. B. Brock, Rising variance: a leading indicator of ecological transition., Ecology letters 

9 3 , 311 (2006). [14] V. Guttal and C. Jayaprakash, Changing skewness: an early warning signal of regime shifts in ecosystems., Ecol-ogy letters 11 5 , 450 (2008). [15] T. M. Bury, R. I. Sujith, I. Pavithran, M. Scheffer, T. M. Lenton, M. Anand, and C. T. Bauch, Deep learning for early warning signals of tipping points, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 118 (2021). [16] F. Grziwotz, C. Chang, V. Dakos, E. H. van Nes, M. Schwarzl¨ ander, O. Kamps, M. Hessler, I. T. Tokuda, A. Telschow, and C. Hsieh, Anticipating the occurrence and type of critical transitions, Science Advances 9

(2023). [17] M. Lukoˇ seviˇ cius and H. Jaeger, Reservoir computing ap-proaches to recurrent neural network training, Comput. Sci. Rev. 3, 127 (2009). [18] H. Jaeger, The “echo state” approach to analysing and training recurrent neural networks-with an erratum note, Bonn, Germany: German National Research Center for Information Technology GMD Technical Report 148 , 13 (2001). [19] X. Li, Q. Zhu, C. Zhao, X. Duan, B. Zhao, X. Zhang, H. Ma, J. Sun, and W. Lin, Higher-order granger reser-voir computing: simultaneously achieving scalable com-plex structures inference and accurate dynamics predic-tion, Nature Communications 15 , 2506 (2024). [20] J. Pathak, B. Hunt, M. Girvan, Z. Lu, and E. Ott, Model-free prediction of large spatiotemporally chaotic systems from data: A reservoir computing approach, Physical re-view letters 120 , 024102 (2018). [21] Q. Zhu, H. Ma, and W. Lin, Detecting unstable periodic orbits based only on time series: When adaptive delayed feedback control meets reservoir computing, Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 29 (2019). [22] Y. Tang, J. Kurths, W. Lin, E. Ott, and L. Kocarev, In-troduction to focus issue: When machine learning meets complex systems: Networks, chaos, and nonlinear dy-namics., Chaos 30 6 , 063151 (2020). [23] J. A. Platt, S. G. Penny, T. A. Smith, T.-C. Chen, and H. D. I. Abarbanel, A systematic exploration of reser-voir computing for forecasting complex spatiotemporal dynamics, Neural networks : the official journal of the International Neural Network Society 153 , 530 (2022). [24] X. Li, Q. Zhu, C. Zhao, X. Qian, X. Zhang, X. Duan, and W. Lin, Tipping point detection using reservoir comput-ing, Research 6 (2023). [25] A. Ascoli, A. S. Demirkol, R. Tetzlaff, and L. O. Chua, Edge of chaos theory resolves smale paradox, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers 

69 , 1252 (2022). [26] T. L. Carroll, Do reservoir computers work best at the edge of chaos?, Chaos 30 12 , 121109 (2020). [27] W. Gilpin, Chaos as an interpretable benchmark for forecasting and data-driven modelling, ArXiv 

abs/2110.05266 (2021). [28] A. Flynn, V. A. Tsachouridis, and A. Amann, Multifunc-tionality in a reservoir computer, Chaos: An Interdisci-plinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 31 (2021). [29] L.-W. Kong, H.-W. Fan, C. Grebogi, and Y.-C. Lai, Ma-chine learning prediction of critical transition and system collapse, Physical Review Research 3, 013090 (2021). [30] D. Patel and E. Ott, Using machine learning to anticipate tipping points and extrapolate to post-tipping dynamics 16 

of non-stationary dynamical systems, Chaos 33 2 , 023143 (2022). [31] S. Panahi and Y.-C. Lai, Adaptable reservoir comput-ing: A paradigm for model-free data-driven prediction of critical transitions in nonlinear dynamical systems, Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 

34 (2024). [32] S. Barone, M. Narcowich, and F. Narcowich, Floquet the-ory and applications, Physical Review A 15 , 1109 (1977). [33] J. Pathak, Z. Lu, B. R. Hunt, M. Girvan, and E. Ott, Us-ing machine learning to replicate chaotic attractors and calculate lyapunov exponents from data, Chaos: An In-terdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 27 (2017). [34] H. Abarbanel, Analysis of observed chaotic data 

(Springer Science & Business Media, 2012). [35] E. Lorenz, Chaos in meteorological forecast, Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences 20 , 130 (1963). [36] Y. Kuramoto, Diffusion-induced chaos in reaction sys-tems, Progress of Theoretical Physics Supplement 64 ,346 (1978). [37] G. I. Sivashinsky, On flame propagation under conditions of stoichiometry, SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics 

39 , 67 (1980). [38] G. Akrivis, D. T. Papageorgiou, and Y.-S. Smyrlis, Com-putational study of the dispersively modified kuramoto– sivashinsky equation, SIAM Journal on Scientific Com-puting 34 , A792 (2012). [39] R. A. Edson, J. E. Bunder, T. W. Mattner, and A. J. Roberts, Lyapunov exponents of the kuramoto– sivashinsky pde, The ANZIAM Journal 61 , 270 (2019). [40] R. Hennekam, B. van der Bolt, E. H. van Nes, G. J. de Lange, M. Scheffer, and G.-J. Reichart, Early-warning signals for marine anoxic events, Geophysical Research Letters 47 , e2020GL089183 (2020). [41] S. Wagner, J. Steinbeck, P. Fuchs, S. Lichtenauer, M. Els¨ asser, J. H. Schippers, T. Nietzel, C. Ruberti, O. Van Aken, A. J. Meyer, et al. , Multiparametric real-time sensing of cytosolic physiology links hypoxia re-sponses to mitochondrial electron transport, New Phy-tologist 224 , 1668 (2019). [42] I. Pavithran and R. Sujith, Effect of rate of change of pa-rameter on early warning signals for critical transitions, Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 

31 (2021). [43] W. O. Committee et al. , Western systems coordinating council disturbance report for the power system outages that occurred on the western interconnection on july 2, 1996 and july 3, 1996, Western Systems Coordinating Council (1996). [44] V. Dakos, M. Scheffer, E. H. Van Nes, V. Brovkin, V. Petoukhov, and H. Held, Slowing down as an early warning signal for abrupt climate change, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105 , 14308 (2008). [45] A. J. Veraart, E. J. Faassen, V. Dakos, E. H. Van Nes, M. L¨ urling, and M. Scheffer, Recovery rates reflect dis-tance to a tipping point in a living system, Nature 481 ,357 (2012). [46] K. Hughen, J. Southon, S. Lehman, and J. Over-peck, Cariaco basin 2000 deglacial 14c and grey scale data, NOAA/NGDC Paleoclimatology Program, IGBP Pages/World Data Center A for Paleoclimatology, Data Contribution Series 69 (2000). [47] N. Boers, Observation-based early-warning signals for a collapse of the atlantic meridional overturning circula-tion, Nature Climate Change 11 , 680 (2021). [48] M. Ben-Yami, V. Skiba, S. Bathiany, and N. Boers, Uncertainties in critical slowing down indicators of observation-based fingerprints of the atlantic overturning circulation, Nature Communications 14 , 8344 (2023). [49] P. Ditlevsen and S. Ditlevsen, Warning of a forthcoming collapse of the atlantic meridional overturning circula-tion, Nature Communications 14 , 1 (2023). [50] X. Liu, X. Chang, S. Leng, H. Tang, K. Aihara, and L. Chen, Detection for disease tipping points by land-scape dynamic network biomarkers, National science re-view 6, 775 (2019). [51] S. L. Michel, D. Swingedouw, P. Ortega, G. Gastineau, J. Mignot, G. McCarthy, and M. Khodri, Early warn-ing signal for a tipping point suggested by a millennial atlantic multidecadal variability reconstruction, Nature Communications 13 , 5176 (2022). [52] B.-W. Qin, W. Lin, et al. , Tipping point for pulsatile oscillations in dynamical networks, Physical Review Re-search 5, 043209 (2023). [53] S. Panahi, Y. Do, A. Hastings, and Y.-C. Lai, Rate-induced tipping in complex high-dimensional ecological networks, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-ences 120 , e2308820120 (2023). [54] Q. Zhu, X. Li, and W. Lin, Leveraging neural differential equations and adaptive delayed feedback to detect un-stable periodic orbits based on irregularly sampled time series, Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 33 (2023). [55] E. Lorenz, Predictability: A problem partly solved, ECMWF Seminar Proceedings I 1 (1995). [56] A. Karimi and M. R. Paul, Extensive chaos in the lorenz-96 model, Chaos: An interdisciplinary journal of nonlin-ear science 20 (2010). [57] R. M. van Westen, M. Kliphuis, and H. A. Dijkstra, Physics-based early warning signal shows that amoc is on tipping course, Science advances 10 , eadk1189 (2024).