Title: Understanding the complexity of frequency and phase angle fluctuations in power grids

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.03133v1

Published Time: Mon, 06 Apr 2026 01:01:45 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
# Understanding the complexity of frequency and phase angle fluctuations in power grids 

Alessandro Lonardi, 1 Jacques M. Maritz, 2 Leonardo Rydin Gorjão, 3, 4 and Christian Beck 1

> 1

Centre for Complex Systems, School of Mathematical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, Mile End Road, London E1 4NS, United Kingdom 

> 2

Department of Engineering Sciences, University of the Free State, Bloemfontein 9301, South Africa 

> 3

Department of Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science, Open University of The Netherlands, Heerlen, 6419AT, The Netherlands 

> 4

Faculty of Science and Technology, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Ås, 1432, Norway 

Power grids must modernize to meet climate goals while maintaining reliable and stable operating conditions. Yet progress is hindered by a limited understanding of the stochastic processes underlying grid frequency and phase-angle fluctuations, which are induced by the growing penetration of renewable generation, consumer demand fluctuations, and market trading. This issue is particularly acute in Africa, where grids often face weak investment. Here, we present results from a newly collected, large-scale, high-resolution dataset of grid frequency and phase angles for the United Kingdom and South Africa, comprising close to one billion data points. Using superstatistical modeling, we treat market-driven power fluctuations as a slowly varying parameter driving grid dynamics and incorporate nonlinear frequency control. As a result, we derive an analytical model that reproduces multimodal frequency distributions previously obtained from numerical simulations, as well as heavy-tailed fluctuations and double-exponential frequency autocorrelation decays, all in excellent agreement with experimental measurements. Beyond frequency, we also address the so far largely overlooked problem of characterizing spatial phase-angle fluctuations. By comparing our predictions with measurement data, we demonstrate that a low-dimensional effective grid model accurately fits South African data despite the grid’s complexity. We also highlight significant differences between the grids of South Africa and the United Kingdom. Our results clarify how energy markets and control policies shape grid dynamics across countries with contrasting infrastructure maturity. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

The 2024 United Nations Climate Change Conference pledged to modernize power grids globally to meet the Paris Agreement temperature goal [1]. Such a commitment faces significant hurdles in many countries, particularly in Africa [2], where electricity transmission often lacks sus-tained investment and the possibility of clean energy adop-tion is limited [3]. Designing future-proof power grids requires collecting high-precision, large-scale data and de-veloping realistic physical models. Research in these di-rections progressed [4–30], but much of it has focused on countries with well-developed infrastructures, prompting a geographical bias. Nevertheless, understanding mech-anisms that govern power grid dynamics is important for systems that have received comparatively little study. Typical drivers that influence grid dynamics include en-ergy market fluctuations [31] and control mechanisms that stabilize the grid frequency to prevent failures [32, 33]. Re-gional markets balance power supply and demand by trad-ing electricity at discrete intervals [34]. Transaction vol-ume fluctuates due to factors like the volatility of electric-ity prices [23] and residential consumption patterns [22], which, in turn, continuously affect grid dynamics. As a result, frequency deviations from the nominal value can exhibit large fluctuations [4, 10, 12, 14, 17, 18, 25]. Heavy-tailed frequency distributions can be reproduced by in-corporating power transactions analytically [18], through non-Gaussian noise [9, 10, 12, 19, 35], via numerical simulations [4, 14] and neural networks [27], or by data extraction [17]. However, these models assume linear frequency control, whereby generators inject power pro-portional to frequency deviations to damp perturbations. This is a good first approximation, but it is unrealistic for large grids [32, 33] where linear control yields unimodal frequency distributions that differ from typically observed multimodal distributions [8, 13, 20, 24, 25]. Recent studies employ nonlinear control [15, 25, 26] but rely on simula-tions and preclude direct data fitting. Grid dynamics is also characterized by phase angles de-scribing the relative rotation of generators. During regular operations, they are phase-locked, namely, generators oper-ate with nearly constant phase-angle differences to prevent disruptions [32, 33]. Phase-locked states are widely stud-ied with dynamical systems methods [21] to investigate grid stability [7, 36], spontaneous synchronization [5, 6], and cascades [11], among other phenomena. Contrarily, their stochastic properties are seldom explored, and mainly in the context of synchronization of synthetic systems [37– 40]. An empirically validated description of phase-angle fluctuations in real-world grids is still missing. To fill these gaps, we collected and analyzed approx-imately one billion frequency and phase-angle measure-ments at a 0.1-s resolution. Our dataset far exceeds pre-vailing coarser, frequency-only datasets resolved at seconds [10, 12, 16–18, 20, 24, 25, 27–29]. We concentrate on four example cities: Stellenbosch and Bloemfontein in South Africa (SA), and London and Glasgow in the United King-dom (UK) (Fig. 1). The British grid is an ideal testbed for theory, owing to extensive research [5–7, 11, 12, 15– 18, 20, 25, 27], tightly regulated control [41, 42], and its centrality in the European energy market [43]. The South African grid is the largest in Africa and is synchronous with eleven other countries in the Southern African mar-ket [44]. Notwithstanding its significance, the grid has faced disruptions for the past two decades [45, 46] and heavily depends on fossil fuels [47], putting a strain on economic growth [48], healthcare [49], and population well-being [50]. The influence of grid features like lenient control [51] on frequency and phase-angle fluctuations re-mains insufficiently quantified, as research has primarily focused on load shedding [52] and private microgrids [53]. Here, we study typical properties of the grid dynam-ics in SA and the UK with a new kind of superstatistical method [54–56]. Generally, a superstatistics is a mixture 

> arXiv:2604.03133v1 [physics.soc-ph] 3 Apr 2026

2of multiple statistics that describes a nonequilibrium sys-tem in a stationary state with a slowly fluctuating inten-sive parameter. Previously, superstatistics for power grids have considered fluctuating control coefficients [12]. By contrast, building on recent studies [22, 27], we treat the market-driven power imbalance between grid generation and load as the fluctuating superstatistical parameter that drives the slow evolution of the grid dynamics. We assume that this parameter evolves on timescales much longer than those of control, so that over short intervals the grid relaxes to local equilibrium states around the nominal frequency. The average of the local equilibrium states, weighted by slow power fluctuations, describes the frequency distri-butions. For phase angles, we employ a reduced grid model, where phase-angle differences are described by a stochastic damped-driven motion in a tilted washboard po-tential [7, 37, 57]. When confronted with measured data, our models ex-plain and quantitatively reproduce key empirical features of frequency distributions, including peaks and dips in-duced by nonlinear control in both SA and the UK, as well as heavy tails. We also observe a double-exponential decay of the frequency autocorrelation in SA. For phase angles, we find empirical support for a reduced-grid model in SA that accurately fits the measured phase-angle differ-ence distribution despite the grid’s underlying complexity. In the UK, no such reduction to a low-dimensional model is observed. Overall, our results illustrate and quantify the subtle differences that can arise across different power grids. 

> RESULTS

For our investigation, fluctuating power-grid frequencies and phase angles are the observables of interest. They are measured using newly installed Phasor Measurement Units (PMUs), which capture electrical waveforms at their in-stallation sites and report frequency and phase-angle mea-surements synchronized to a standard GPS time reference. The measurements are processed to remove spurious data and yield six fine-grained time series (two for frequencies in London and Stellenbosch, four for phase angles in each city) with a 0.1-s resolution over six months, from April to October 2025 (see Materials and Methods for details). For convenience, in all figures and calculations, we convert the frequency 𝑓 (𝑡 ) in Hz to the angular velocity 

𝜔 (𝑡 ) := 2𝜋 ( 𝑓 (𝑡 ) − 𝑓 R) in rad /s, where 𝑓 R = 50 Hz is the nominal frequency in the UK and SA. Phase angles 𝜃 (𝑡 )

are in radians. 

> Frequency

To observe typical daily variations of frequency dynam-ics, we aggregate the measurements into 24 h intervals. The resulting profiles are shown in Fig. 2A, D, where the frequencies fluctuate around the nominal value. In the UK, fluctuations are tightly clustered, whereas in SA they are much broader, with average standard deviations 

𝜎 SA ≈ 1.6 𝜎 UK . This difference reflects the distinct fre-quency control mechanisms of the two grids. The UK’s control linearly dampens fluctuations below 0.2 Hz , with an  

> FIG. 1. Power grids in the UK and SA. Grid nodes include power plants and substations, while links represent transmission lines connecting them. Node and link data were retrieved sepa-rately from Open Infrastructure Map (https://openinframap.org) and matched by aggregating link endpoints and nodes within
> 3.33 km . After merging, loops and duplicate lines were removed. The final networks consist of a single connected component with 2059 nodes and 2614 links for SA, and 2115 nodes and 2467 links for the UK. Cities where PMUs were installed are marked, along with Johannesburg and Cape Town, which are connected by a main transmission corridor running diagonally across SA and relevant to phase-angle fluctuations.

additional linear layer between 0.1 Hz and 0.2 Hz [41, 42]. In SA, contracted generators linearly dampen fluctuations above 0.15 Hz , but no control is mandated below this threshold. Non-contracted generators only dampen fluc-tuations above 0.5 Hz [51]. In both grids, control has finite precision: if fluctuations are small, for instance, below 

0.01 Hz , it stays idle [58]. The region around the utility frequency without control is known as the grid frequency deadband. Fig. 2A, D also display intermittent large fluctuations due to market transactions [10, 12, 18]. These occur every 

30 min in the UK and 1 h in SA, consistent with energy markets’ intraday calendars [43, 44]. Such fluctuations dampen in the UK between 8-11 a.m. and 2-8 p.m., and in SA between 8 a.m.-2 p.m. and 9 p.m.-1 a.m., when heterogeneous consumer activity rises. Details on control and markets in the UK and SA are in SI Appendix , Notes S2, S3, Fig. S6, S7. Control, market, and consumer demand produce the mul-timodal, heavy-tailed distributions in Fig. 2B, E. Accurately describing their features is our first main modeling chal-lenge. We model frequency dynamics with the aggregated swing equation [59], 

d𝜔 

d𝑡 = 𝐻 (𝜔 ) + 𝑃 (𝑡 ) + 𝜖𝜉 , (1) which expresses energy conservation in the grid (see Ma-terials and Methods for its derivation and full description). In Eq. (1), 𝐻 (𝜔 ) represents frequency control, which we 3model as a piecewise linear function as shown in Fig. 2F. We split the imbalance between generated and consumed power into two components: 𝑃 (𝑡 ), the slowly varying term central to our superstatistical model, and the noise 𝜖𝜉 , in-corporating the fast fluctuations not resolved in 𝑃 (𝑡 ). The noise also accounts for other fast fluctuating sources, such as short-term volatility generation or rapidly changing con-sumer demand [9, 60]. In detail, we assume that the evolution of 𝑃 (𝑡 ) is slow relative to the control damping rates, which describe how quickly the grid responds to a frequency fluctua-tion. To get quantitative estimates, we extract the damp-ing rates with Kernel Regression (KR) [61, 62] and find 

𝜏 = 4.06 ± 0.03 min in the UK and 𝜏 = 9.07 ± 0.04 min 

in SA (see Materials and Methods ). Power data, namely measured values for the difference 𝑃 (𝑡 ) between power production and demand, are often scarce [22, references therein], and in our case, unavailable. However, large-scale power adjustments are generally organized on market time scales ( 30 min in the UK and 1 h in SA), which set a horizon for slow changes in the system imbalance [27]. More importantly, Eq. (1) allows us to choose the sepa-ration of time scales conventionally, absorbing all fluctu-ations of the same order as 𝜏 into noise and control and retaining only slower variations in 𝑃 (𝑡 ). The inferred grid coefficients should therefore be understood as effective pa-rameters that depend on the chosen time-scale separation. Taken together, this evidence provides quantitative support for the use of superstatistics. We assume Gaussian white noise 𝜉 ∼ N ( 0, 1) with amplitude 𝜖 , which gives an ana-lytically tractable superstatistical model with a multimodal frequency distribution, fitting those in Fig. 2B, E. A discus-sion on alternative noise choices is given in SI Appendix ,Note S5. Employing superstatistics, we treat 𝑃 (𝑡 ) = 𝑃 as effec-tively constant over short time intervals (of the order of 

𝜏 ) and model the frequency distribution as an ensemble average of microstates 𝜔 -given-𝑃 :

𝑝 (𝜔 ) ∝ 

∫

𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) 𝜑 (𝑃 ) d𝑃 . (2) The distribution 𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) describes the short-term equili-brated grid microstate 𝜔 -given-𝑃 , before the slow power change causes it to drift. Integrating against 𝜑 (𝑃 ) accounts for the distribution of slow power fluctuations. We calcu-late 𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) in closed-form by solving a Fokker–Planck equation obtained from Eq. (1) (see Materials and Meth-ods ). Its expression, in conjunction with Eq. (2), yields rich quantitative insights and captures all features of the frequency histograms. The frequency deadband in the UK exhibits a pro-nounced suppression. Using moment-generating func-tions, we show that a dip emerges in the deadband for any non-degenerate power distribution with E[𝑃 ] = 0

and E[𝑃 2] > 0. The first condition follows from energy conservation, while the second is true if 𝑃 (𝑡 ) is not triv-ially 𝑃 (𝑡 ) ≡ 0. Beyond this first formal argument, we refine the estimation of deadband dips. We assume con-stant power, 𝜑 (𝑃 ) = 𝑐 , within a small interval of width 

𝛿 around 𝑃 = 0. This yields the closed-form expression 

𝑝 (𝜔 ) ∝ ( 𝑐𝜖 2/𝜔 ) sinh (𝛿𝜔 /𝜖 2) for the deadband distribu-tion (see Materials and Methods ). In Fig. 2C, we fit the distribution to the UK data via Maximum-Likelihood Esti-mation (MLE) and obtain excellent agreement between the-ory and observations. SA data exhibit a less pronounced dip, which, although similar in interpretation, precludes MLE. See SI Appendix , Note S11 for algorithmic details. Two peaks arise at the boundary between control re-gions, namely at ±0.1 Hz in the UK and ±0.15 Hz in SA, with substantially larger magnitudes in SA. Their emer-gence can also be explained by piecewise linear control. Formally, 𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) takes the form of a Gaussian branch in each linearly damped region. At the boundary, branches from different regions merge under the integral in Eq. (2), leading to an accumulation of probability mass that man-ifests as local maxima, with varying damping strengths influencing peak heights. We validate this argument by ex-tracting damping coefficients in the linearly damped con-trol regions through fitting the frequency autocorrelation in Fig. 2H. Specifically, we derive a closed-form ansatz for the autocorrelation as a weighted sum of two exponentials 

𝐶 (Δ𝑡 ) = 𝐴 exp (− 𝛾 1Δ𝑡 ) + ( 1 − 𝐴 ) exp (− 𝛾 2Δ𝑡 ), where 𝛾 1

and 𝛾 2 are the damping coefficients for the inner and outer regions, while 0 ≤ 𝐴 ≤ 1 is a weight parameter (see Ma-terials and Methods ). We interpolate the autocorrelation using nonlinear least squares. The fit supports our argu-ment: in the UK, the autocorrelation is well-described by a single exponential, indicating similar damping strengths, hence attenuated peaks. The best fit for SA requires two distinct coefficients, 𝛾 1 = (8.6 ± 0.2)· 10 −4 rad /s and 

𝛾 2 = (1.15 ±0.02 )· 10 −4 rad /s. Double-exponential decays, indicative of nonlinear control, have been observed in grids worldwide but had not yet been quantified [12, 16, 24]. Finally, we examine the tails of the frequency distribu-tions. In Fig. 2G, the UK data exhibit heavy tails that are accurately captured by a 𝑞 -Gaussian MLE fit with power law heavy tails [63]. In our superstatistical model, heavy tails are inherited by 𝜑 (𝑃 ). We show with saddlepoint ap-proximation [64] that power law tails arise in 𝑝 (𝜔 ) when 

𝜑 (𝑃 ) follows a power law distribution and the Gaussian profile of 𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) is sufficiently peaked (see Materials and Methods ). 𝑞 -Gaussian distributions also arise from superstatistics applied to power grids where the frequency control is modeled by an effective friction following a chi-squared profile [12]. Our model offers a complementary explanation for heavy tails where control remains constant, and slow power fluctuations mix the system’s microstates. SA data exhibit a small peak in the tails, indicative of a transition between control regions at 0.5 Hz . The data be-yond this peak are insufficient to fit the tail distributions in a reliable manner. 

> Phase angles

Our second main challenge is to characterize the statistics of phase-angle fluctuations. To this end, we evaluate phase-angle differences 𝑥 (𝑡 ) = 𝜃 1 (𝑡 ) − 𝜃 2 (𝑡 ) between 𝜃 1 (𝑡 ) and 

𝜃 2 (𝑡 ) measured in Stellenbosch and Bloemfontein, and in London and Glasgow. During regular operations, the grid is phase-locked. Namely, 𝑥 (𝑡 ) stays approximately constant over time as shown in Fig. 3A, where phase-locked states appear as diagonal bands with unit slope. Contrary to the frequencies, phase-difference bands in the UK are broader than in SA, highlighting a structural difference between the two grids. Large frequency fluctuations in SA due to lenient 4                          

> FIG. 2. Frequency measurements in SA and the UK. We conventionally use data from Stellenbosch and London to represent their countries, as, during regular operations, they are effectively identical to those in Bloemfontein and Glasgow. MLE fits in panels C and G are done with one million points sampled uniformly from the frequency signal in the deadband and tails. (A, D) Average frequency time series aggregated over 24 h . Lighter areas are standard deviations. (B, E) Frequency histograms. Vertical lines indicate the control regions of panel F. The peaks at ±𝜔 1are asymmetric due to finite-size effects. The histogram’s robustness is validated by splitting the data into monthly segments in SI Appendix , Note S1, Fig. S4, S5. (C) MLE fit in the deadband. Data is fitted in Ω0(see panel F) and plotted over a larger interval. The dashed line is the uniform fit that neglects the slow power contribution [12]. (F) Control function. In the deadband Ω0there is no control. In Ω1and Ω2control is linear with coefficients 𝛾 1< 𝛾 2. The 𝑦 -axis is arbitrarily scaled. (G) Tails. The left and right tails are aggregated. In the UK, the tail at |𝜔 |> 𝜔 1is fitted with a Gaussian and a 𝑞 -Gaussian. See SI Appendix , Note S7, S11, Fig. S9. (H) Autocorrelation at short time lags Δ𝑡 ≤20 min with lighter areas being standard deviations. We fit a single- and a double-decay ansatz. See SI Appendix , Note S8.

control are coherent across the grid and shift all phase an-gles around their locked values. Instead, phase-difference fluctuations are location-specific. We ascribe their greater magnitude in the UK to the high penetration of renewable energy sources. This interpretation is corroborated by the fact that renewables account for approximately 40% and 8% of power generation in the UK and SA, respectively [47, 65]. We use a reduced grid model to describe the dynam-ics of 𝑥 (𝑡 ). For tractability, we neglect superstatistics and assume constant power generation, consider only the effec-tive interaction between two generators 𝜃 1 (𝑡 ) and 𝜃 2 (𝑡 ), and take linear control for simplicity. Under these assumptions, we can recast energy conservation as a stochastic damped-driven harmonic oscillator in a tilted washboard potential 

𝑉 (𝑥 ) [7, 37] (see Materials and Methods ): 

d2𝑥 

d𝑡 2 + 𝛾 d𝑥 

d𝑡 + d𝑉 

d𝑥 = 𝜖𝜉 (3) 

𝑉 (𝑥 ) := −𝛿𝑥 − 2𝜅 cos 𝑥 . (4) In Eq. (3), 𝛾 denotes the constant control coefficient, and 

𝜖𝜉 is Gaussian white noise as in Eq. (1). We reuse 𝜖 for simplicity, but generally, the two noise amplitudes in the two equations differ. In Eq. (4), 𝛿 quantifies the differ-ence of mechanical power between generators, and 𝜅 is a transmission coupling controlling power exchange. Eq. (3) admits the stationary distribution 𝑝 (𝑥 ) ∝

exp (− 𝛾𝑉 (𝑥 )/ 𝜖 2) [57], which describes the probability of finding the system near a stable potential minimum located at 𝑥 min = arcsin (𝛿 /2𝜅 ) (see Materials and Methods ). We fit 𝑝 (𝑥 ) to the SA data using MLE and find close agreement between model and observations. This outcome is surpris-ingly good, given that the grid is a highly complex system, yet it is well-captured by the simple model in Eqs. (3)-5         

> FIG. 3. Phase angle measurements in SA and the UK. (A) Phase-locked hexbin distributions. A companion figure showing data processing is in SI Appendix , Fig. S1. (B) MLE fit of the phase-angle difference histogram in SA. Both the potential
> 𝑉 (𝑥 )and the corresponding distribution 𝑝 (𝑥 )obtained from the MLE are drawn. The fit was performed using one million points sampled uniformly from 𝑥 (𝑡 ).

(4). A plausible explanation is the strong dominance of the two regions around Johannesburg and Cape Town, which account for most of the grid activity and are linked by a transmission corridor running diagonally across the coun-try, as shown in Fig. 1. The reduced model does not fit the UK data, as the ansatz 𝑝 (𝑥 ) appears to be incompatible with the regional characteristics of the UK; SI Appendix ,Note S10, Fig. S3. We expect phase-angle differences in the UK to require more refined modeling assumptions. 

> DISCUSSION

In this work, we analyzed high-resolution frequency and phase-angle time series from the British and South African power grids using methods rooted in statistical physics. The frequency data exhibit multimodal, heavy-tailed dis-tributions (Fig. 2B, E). We show that their features are ac-curately described by a superstatistical model in which slow fluctuations in the grid power imbalance drive the system’s long-term evolution. Within this framework, the station-ary distribution of the aggregated swing equation (Eq. (1)) becomes an average of short-time equilibrated microstates weighted by power-imbalance fluctuations (Eq. (2)). The salient advantage of such a formulation is that it enables the integration of nonlinear frequency control, allowing us to derive and fit an analytical expression in the dead-band dip (Fig. 2C), explain control-induced multimodality (Fig. 2B, E), describe and fit heavy tails well represented by a 𝑞 -Gaussian distribution (Fig. 2G), and account for the double-exponential decay of the frequency autocorrelation (Fig. 2H). Earlier models employed a different version of superstatistics with fluctuating control coefficients [12] or were based on simpler constructive assumptions for the power-imbalance profile [18] combined with linear con-trol, thereby capturing only partially the histogram features. Nonlinear control has been modeled mainly with numerical schemes so far [15, 25, 26]. By contrast, our new results presented here advance a data-driven analytical model in close quantitative agreement with empirical observations. The stochastic properties of phase-angle dynamics have, to date, received comparatively little attention in the lit-erature. Although they have been investigated with syn-thetic experiments [37–39], a large-scale empirical valida-tion of theoretical predictions has been lacking. We show that an effective two-generator grid model (Eqs. (3)-(4)) accurately describes the phase-angle difference distribu-tion between Stellenbosch and Bloemfontein. The level of agreement observed in Fig. 3B is remarkable given the structural and dynamical complexity of the real-world grid (Fig. 1). As a plausible explanation for this closer-than-expected coincidence, we argue that the South African grid is dominated by two generation-load centers in Johannes-burg and Cape Town, effectively reducing an otherwise high-dimensional system to a low-dimensional one. Our findings are supported by a newly obtained set of data points consisting of about one billion measurements sampled at 0.1-s resolution, demonstrating that large-scale, high-resolution measurements are essential for a detailed understanding of the statistical signatures of grid dynamics. Overall, we have demonstrated how country-specific fac-tors such as control regulations, energy-market organiza-tion and scheduling, energy mix, and infrastructure matu-rity shape the statistical properties of grid observables. We also hypothesize that the higher fraction of renewables in the United Kingdom, together with structural grid differ-ences, additionally contribute to the differences observed in the stochastic properties of both frequency and phase angles. Regarding implementation details and further refine-ments of the superstatistical model developed in this paper, it would be of interest to directly extract the statistics of the slow power imbalance 𝑃 (𝑡 ) from measured frequency data and then integrate Eq. (2). Doing so could also en-able fitting the long-time power-law decay observed in the frequency autocorrelation using a superstatistics-motivated ansatz that would explicitly account for frequency jumps caused by market transactions. At present, these detailed features related to jump processes are not covered by our model. 

> MATERIALS AND METHODS Data Collection and Processing

We accessed the PMUs data using the GridRadar API (https://gridradar.net). The raw time series span six months and comprise approximately one billion data points. We processed them to remove spurious measurements returned by the PMUs following these steps: (1) Rare ( < 1% ) NaN 

entries were present in the data and were accounted for us-ing NaN -robust operations. (2) Numerical instabilities oc-curred after a few hourly intervals with missing data, when the PMUs returned no value. To remove them, we dis-6carded a 10-hour window after each empty interval, which was chosen at convenience to cover all spurious measure-ments. (3) We trimmed phase-angle artifacts lying outside the bands in Fig. 3A by filtering out points outside the range Δ1 ≤ 𝑥 ≤ Δ2. We chose Δ1, Δ2 separately for each band such that less than 0.02% of the data is removed. (4) PMUs introduced artifacts due to GPS clock corrections [66]. These appeared as stepwise jumps in the phase-angle differences 𝑥 (𝑡 ). We removed them by extracting the lower envelope of the signal, which preserves its stochastic pro-file while excluding artifacts. All results for phase-angle differences are given in terms of lower envelopes. For details on (3)-(4), see SI Appendix , Note S1, Figs. S1, S3. 

> Aggregated Swing Equation

The dynamics of a grid with 𝑖 = 1, . . . , 𝑁 generators obeys in good approximation the swing equations [32, 33], which express energy conservation in terms of the gener-ators’ phase angles 𝜃 𝑖 (𝑡 ) ∈ [ 0, 2𝜋 ) and angular velocities 

𝜔 𝑖 (𝑡 ) := 2𝜋 ( 𝑓 𝑖 (𝑡 ) − 𝑓 R) [7, for a derivation]. Since during regular operation 𝜔 𝑖 (𝑡 ) = 𝜔 (𝑡 ) for all 𝑖 , the grid dynamics can be recast into the aggregated Eq. (1), controlling the angular velocity 𝜔 (𝑡 ), independent of 𝑖 . We outline the essential steps of its derivation below. Details are in SI Appendix , Note S4. For each generator 𝑖 , the swing equations read 

d𝜃 𝑖 

d𝑡 = 𝜔 𝑖 (5) 

𝑀 𝑖 

d𝜔 𝑖 

d𝑡 = 𝐻 𝑖 (𝜔 𝑖 ) + 𝑃 𝑖 (𝑡 ) + 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝐾 𝑖 𝑗 sin (𝜃 𝑗 − 𝜃 𝑖 ) + 𝜖 𝑖 𝜉 𝑖 .

(6) In Eq. (6), the 𝑀 𝑖 denote the generator inertia. The func-tion 𝐻 𝑖 (𝜔 𝑖 ) represents frequency control, which we ex-plicitly define below for the aggregated equation. The term 

𝑃 𝑖 (𝑡 ) is the slow net power output of the generator, cap-turing its supply-demand imbalance with consumers. We assume a superstatistical separation of time scales: each 

𝑃 𝑖 (𝑡 ) evolves slowly compared to the control rates. Fast fluctuations are incorporated into the i.i.d. Gaussian white noise 𝜉 𝑖 with amplitude 𝜖 𝑖 . The non-negative coupling co-efficients 𝐾 𝑖 𝑗 regulate the power exchanged between gen-erators. If 𝑖 and 𝑗 are not connected, then 𝐾 𝑖 𝑗 = 0.The grid regulates power production to balance the ag-gregated slow power 𝑃 (𝑡 ) in Eq. (1), ensuring equilibrium on average [12, 18]: 

𝑃 (𝑡 ) :=

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝑃 𝑖 (𝑡 )

Í𝑁 𝑖 =1 𝑀 𝑖 

⟨𝑃 ⟩ := lim 

> 𝑇 →∞

∫ 𝑇 

> 0

𝑃 (𝑡 ) d𝑡 = 0 .

(7) By rescaling and summing Eq. (6) over 𝑖 , the sine con-tributions vanish. Hence, we recover Eq. (1). In Eq. (1), we also swap 𝐻 𝑖 (𝜔 𝑖 ) with 𝐻 (𝜔 ) by assuming homoge-neous control for all generators. We model control as 

𝐻 (𝜔 ) := −sgn (𝜔 ) ℎ(| 𝜔 |) , with 

ℎ(𝑥 ) :=



0 𝑥 ∈ Ω0

𝛾 1 (𝑥 − 𝜔 0) 𝑥 ∈ Ω1

𝛾 2 (𝑥 − 𝜔 1) + 𝛾 1 (𝜔 1 − 𝜔 0) 𝑥 ∈ Ω2 ,

(8) where Ω0, Ω1, and Ω2 denote the deadband, the inner control region, and the outer control region of Fig. 2F, respectively. 

> Superstatistics Validation: Kernel regression (KR)

We estimate the control damping coefficients and noise amplitudes from the data and use them to obtain the control damping rates. The estimation is performed using KR [61, 62], as explained below. Extensive details are given in 

SI Appendix , Note S9, Fig. S11. First, we detrend frequencies to remove slow drifts, like those caused by market transactions. Specifically, we focus on 𝜔 det (𝑡 ) := 𝜔 (𝑡 ) − 𝜔 filter (𝑡 ), where 𝜔 filter (𝑡 ) is the fre-quency signal filtered with a Gaussian kernel with 𝜎 = 60 s 

[29, 62]. For validation purposes only, we approximate 𝐻 (𝜔 ) by a linear function with a single damping coefficient 𝛾 . Es-timating region-specific damping reliably with KR is hard, as it requires continuous signals, whereas the data fluctuate across control regions. Here, 𝛾 can be interpreted as de-scribing the aggregate contribution of the control function across the regions in Eq. (8). Then, we extract the finite-difference drift estimator 

𝐷 1 (𝜔 ) := 1

Δ𝑡 PMU 

⟨𝜔 det (𝑡 + Δ𝑡 PMU ) − 𝜔 det (𝑡 ) | 𝜔 det (𝑡 ) = 𝜔 ⟩ .

(9) In Eq. (9), ⟨· | 𝜔 det (𝑡 ) = 𝜔 ⟩ denotes a kernel-weighted con-ditional average at 𝜔 det (𝑡 ) = 𝜔 and Δ𝑡 PMU = 0.1 s . Fol-lowing previous works [52], we use a scaled Epanechnikov kernel 𝐾 ℎ (𝑥 ) = 3[1 − ( 𝑥 /ℎ)2]/ 4ℎ, |𝑥 | < ℎ [52], with 

ℎ = 0.1 rad /s.The estimator 𝐷 1 (𝜔 ) is linear with a negative slope. We use linear least squares to extract its slope, which is the estimate of 𝛾 ; the extracted value is consistent with previous work [12, 18, 26, 27, 29]. The damping rates are calculated as 𝜏 = 1/𝛾 , since 𝛾 sets an exponential relaxation timescale on the frequency. We also obtain an estimate of the deadband escape time by extracting 𝜖 with KR and employing mean first-passage time theory [67]. All these estimates back up the use of superstatistics. 

> Frequency Distribution: Analytical Derivation

Below, we outline calculations; details are in SI Ap-pendix , Note S6, Fig. S8. To compute 𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ), we solve the Fokker–Planck equa-tion corresponding to the Langevin equation in Eq. (1). Specifically, we integrate its “stationary” solution satisfy-ing 𝜕 𝑓 /𝜕𝑡 = 0 in the short time intervals where 𝑃 can be kept constant, and enforce continuity at the control bound-aries ±𝜔 0, ±𝜔 1. This yields 

𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) = 1

𝑍 ×



exp 

 2𝑃 𝜖 2 𝜔 



𝜔 ∈ Ω0

𝐶 1 exp 



− 𝛾 1

𝜖 2 (𝜔 − Λ1)2

𝜔 ∈ Ω1

𝐶 2 exp 



− 𝛾 2

𝜖 2 (𝜔 − Λ2)2

𝜔 ∈ Ω2 ,

(10) 7where we defined 

Λ1 := sgn (𝜔 ) 𝜔 0 + 𝑃 /𝛾 1 (11) 

Λ2 := sgn (𝜔 ) 𝜔 1 − ( 𝛾 1/𝛾 2) sgn (𝜔 ) ( 𝜔 1 − 𝜔 0) + 𝑃 /𝛾 2 .

(12) The scaling factors 𝐶 1 and 𝐶 2 ensure continuity. These factors, together with Λ1 and Λ2, are constant over the two branches 𝜔 < 0, 𝜔 > 0, and therefore depend only on the sign of 𝜔 and 𝑃 . The global normalization 𝑍 depends on 𝑃 .Regrettably, 𝑍 is not analytically integrable and precludes solving directly Eq. (2). 

> Frequency deadband

To study the frequency deadband, we focus on small, nonzero values of 𝑃 , as these effectively capture 𝑝 (𝜔 ) in 

Ω0: for large 𝑃 , 𝑍 suppresses the distribution in Ω0. In the small-𝑃 regime, we approximate 𝑍 by a constant thereby obtaining 𝑝 (𝜔 ) ∝ 𝑀 𝜑 (2𝜔 /𝜖 2) from Eq. (10) in Ω0, where 

𝑀 𝜑 is the moment-generating function of 𝑃 . Expanding it at 𝜔 = 0 gives 

d𝑝 

d𝜔 𝜔 =0

∝ E[𝑃 ] d2 𝑝 

d𝜔 2 𝜔 =0

∝ E[𝑃 2] , (13) showing us that any non-degenerate distribution 𝜑 (𝑃 ) with positive second moment produces a minimum at 𝜔 = 0

that arises from averaging 𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) in Ω0. The condition 

E𝜑 [𝑃 ] = 0 holds from energy conservation expressed in Eq. (7) and assuming ergodicity. Assuming further that 𝜑 (𝑃 ) = 𝑐 for small |𝑃 | ≤ 𝛿 /2,we can integrate Eq. (2) to accurately fit the deadband in Fig. 2C. Details are in SI Appendix , Note S7. 

> Peaks and Autocorrelation

The frequency distribution peaks at ±𝜔 1 are captured by Eq. (10). Integrating Eq. (2) over Ω1 and Ω2 amounts to doing a convolution of the Gaussian branches of Eq. (10) with 𝜑 (𝑃 ). If 𝜑 (𝑃 ) has sufficient support around 𝑃 =

𝛾 (𝜔 1 − 𝜔 0) and does not strongly favor one branch over the other, the convolution roughly preserves the relative prominence of each Gaussian. Particularly, the branches in 

Ω2 produce taller peaks than those in Ω1, as 𝛾 2 > 𝛾 1; SI Appendix , Note S7. To verify that 𝛾 2 > 𝛾 1 experimentally, we study the fre-quency autocorrelation. KR does not allow us to extract region-specific damping coefficients. We circumvent this limitation by computing the second moment of 𝜔 condi-tioned on 𝑃 , which, when integrated against 𝜑 (𝑃 ), yields the autocorrelation for short time lags. Even without know-ing 𝜑 (𝑃 ), this approach shows that the autocorrelation is well described by a weighted sum of two exponential de-cays, with decay rates 𝛾 1, 𝛾 2; SI Appendix , Note S8. The estimates are consistent with those found with KR. At long time lags, the autocorrelation decays as a power law, consistent with previous findings [25] where this de-cay is modeled with fractional noise [68]; SI Appendix , Fig. S10. In our model, the slow evolution of 𝑃 (𝑡 ) may induce long-term correlations in frequency, warranting further in-vestigation. 

> Heavy Tails

𝑞 -Gaussian tails are compatible with our model. In par-ticular, we show that power law tails, characteristic of 𝑞 -Gaussian distributions, arise if 𝜑 (𝑃 ) ∝ | 𝑃 |−𝛽 . We approx-imate 𝐻 (𝜔 ) by a linear function with a single damping coefficient 𝛾 . This is not restrictive, as we are now focus-ing on the tails of 𝑝 (𝜔 ), where the non-linear profile of 

𝐻 (𝜔 ) is negligible. With this approximation, Eq. (10) re-duces to a Gaussian convolved with 𝜑 (𝑃 ). For sufficiently large 𝜔 compared to the width of the Gaussian, specifically, when 𝜔 ≫ 𝜖 /√︁ 2𝛾 , the convolution can be evaluated using saddlepoint approximation and gives 

𝑝 (𝜔 ) ∝ √︂ 𝜋 𝛾 𝜖 |𝜔 |−𝛽 



1 + 𝑂 

 𝜖 2

2𝛾𝜔 2

  

≃√︂ 𝜋 𝛾 𝜖 |𝜔 |−𝛽 .

(14) For all mathematical details, see SI Appendix , Note S7. 

> Tilted-Washboard Potential

We outline the essential steps to derive Eqs. (3)-(4) from the swing equation in Eqs. (5)-(6). Details are in SI Appendix , Note S10, Fig. S12. We substitute Eq. (5) into Eq. (6) and take 𝑁 = 2,which gives us two second-order stochastic differential equations controlling 𝜃 1 (𝑡 ) and 𝜃 2 (𝑡 ). We further assume 

𝛾 = 𝐷 1/𝑀 1 = 𝐷 2/𝑀 2, 𝜅 = 𝐾 12 /𝑀 1 = 𝐾 21 /𝑀 2 [7, 37]. Subtracting the swing equation for 𝜃 1 (𝑡 ) from that for 𝜃 2 (𝑡 ),we obtain Eq. (3), where 𝛿 := 𝑃 1/𝑀 1 − 𝑃 2/𝑀 2. The noise 

𝜖𝜉 is Gaussian if 𝜉 1, 𝜉 2 are i.i.d. Gaussian. Neglecting the noise, we classify the equilibria of Eq. (3) and find that, during regular operations, the reduced grid is locked at the stable point 𝑥 min = arcsin (𝛿 /2𝜅 ).Eq. (3) yields a Smoluchowski (overdamped Fokker– Planck) equation, which we couple with a continuity equa-tion for 𝑝 (𝑥 ) and its probability current 𝐽 (𝑥 ). These equa-tions can be solved in a periodic potential, such as 𝑉 (𝑥 )

in Eq. (4) [57]. The SA data reveal that phase differences 

𝑥 are tightly localized in the potential well at 𝑥 min and are accurately described by 𝑝 (𝑥 ) when 𝐽 (𝑥 ) ≡ 0, which we fit in Fig. 3B. 

> Data, Materials, and Software Availability

All numerical routines are open-sourced and tested us-ing synthetic data at https://github.com/aleable/power-grid-complexity. Representative empirical datasets, includ-ing frequency measurements from London and phase-angle measurements from Stellenbosch and Bloem-fontein of August 2025, are also publicly available at https://zenodo.org/records/19397526 

> Acknowledgements

The authors acknowledge funding by the UKRI-STFC grant UKRI467 “Stability of the South African power grid—a statistical physics-based approach” . L.R.G ac-knowledges the support of the Norwegian FME SOLAR grant, RCN 350244. A.L. acknowledges discussions with 8Günther Neuwirth, providing technical information on the PMUs. The authors thank Arash Rezaeinazhad and Deniz Eroğlu for processing and providing the data for Fig. 1. 

[1] United Nations Climate Change Conference, COP29 Global Energy Storage and Grids Pledge (2024). [2] World Economic Forum, Why scaling clean energy in the Global South is a three-legged balancing act (2025). [3] International Energy Agency, World Energy Outlook 2024 (2024). [4] T. Weissbach and E. Welfonder, High frequency deviations within the European Power System: Origins and proposals for improvement, in 2009 IEEE/PES Power Systems Confer-ence and Exposition (2009) pp. 1–6. [5] M. Rohden, A. Sorge, M. Timme, and D. Witthaut, Self-organized synchronization in decentralized power grids, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109 , 064101 (2012). [6] A. E. Motter, S. A. Myers, M. Anghel, and T. Nishikawa, Spontaneous synchrony in power-grid networks, Nature Physics 9, 191 (2013). [7] D. Manik, D. Witthaut, B. Schäfer, M. Matthiae, A. Sorge, M. Rohden, E. Katifori, and M. Timme, Supply networks: Instabilities without overload, The European Physical Jour-nal Special Topics 223 , 2527 (2014). [8] F. M. Mele, Á. Ortega, R. Zárate-Miñano, and F. Milano, Impact of variability, uncertainty and frequency regulation on power system frequency distribution, in 2016 Power Sys-tems Computation Conference (PSCC) (2016) pp. 1–8. [9] M. Anvari, G. Lohmann, M. Wächter, P. Milan, E. Lorenz, D. Heinemann, M. R. R. Tabar, and J. Peinke, Short term fluctuations of wind and solar power systems, New Journal of Physics 18 , 063027 (2016). [10] B. Schäfer, M. Timme, and D. Witthaut, Isolating the Impact of Trading on Grid Frequency Fluctuations, in 2018 IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference Europe (ISGT-Europe) (2018) pp. 1–5. [11] B. Schäfer, D. Witthaut, M. Timme, and V. Latora, Dy-namically induced cascading failures in power grids, Nature Communications 9, 1975 (2018). [12] B. Schäfer, C. Beck, K. Aihara, D. Witthaut, and M. Timme, Non-Gaussian power grid frequency fluctuations character-ized by Lévy-stable laws and superstatistics, Nature Energy 

3, 119 (2018). [13] X. Deng, H. Li, W. Yu, W. Weikang, and Y. Liu, Fre-quency Observations and Statistic Analysis of Worldwide Main Power Grids Using FNET/GridEye, in 2019 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM) (2019) pp. 1–5. [14] H. Haehne, K. Schmietendorf, S. Tamrakar, J. Peinke, and S. Kettemann, Propagation of wind-power-induced fluctua-tions in power grids, Phys. Rev. E 99 , 050301 (2019). [15] P. Vorobev, D. M. Greenwood, J. H. Bell, J. W. Bialek, P. C. Taylor, and K. Turitsyn, Deadbands, Droop, and Iner-tia Impact on Power System Frequency Distribution, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 34 , 3098 (2019). [16] L. Rydin Gorjão, R. Jumar, H. Maass, V. Hagenmeyer, G. C. Yalcin, J. Kruse, M. Timme, C. Beck, D. Witthaut, and B. Schäfer, Open database analysis of scaling and spatio-temporal properties of power grid frequencies, Nature Com-munications 11 , 6362 (2020). [17] M. Anvari, L. Rydin Gorjão, M. Timme, D. Witthaut, B. Schäfer, and H. Kantz, Stochastic properties of the fre-quency dynamics in real and synthetic power grids, Phys. Rev. Res. 2, 013339 (2020). [18] L. Rydin Gorjão, M. Anvari, H. Kantz, C. Beck, D. Witthaut, M. Timme, and B. Schäfer, Data-Driven Model of the Power-Grid Frequency Dynamics, IEEE Access 8, 43082 (2020). [19] L. Rydin Gorjão, B. Schäfer, D. Witthaut, and C. Beck, Spatio-temporal complexity of power-grid frequency fluctu-ations, New Journal of Physics 23 , 073016 (2021). [20] D. del Giudice, A. Brambilla, S. Grillo, and F. Bizzarri, Ef-fects of inertia, load damping and dead-bands on frequency histograms and frequency control of power systems, Inter-national Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems 129 ,106842 (2021). [21] D. Witthaut, F. Hellmann, J. Kurths, S. Kettemann, H. Meyer-Ortmanns, and M. Timme, Collective nonlinear dynamics and self-organization in decentralized power grids, Rev. Mod. Phys. 94 , 015005 (2022). [22] M. Anvari, E. Proedrou, B. Schäfer, C. Beck, H. Kantz, and M. Timme, Data-driven load profiles and the dynamics of residential electricity consumption, Nature Communications 

13 , 4593 (2022). [23] C. Han, H. Hilger, E. Mix, P. C. Böttcher, M. Reyers, C. Beck, D. Witthaut, and L. R. Gorjão, Complexity and Persistence of Price Time Series of the European Electricity Spot Market, PRX Energy 1, 013002 (2022). [24] X. Wen, M. Anvari, L. Rydin Gorjão, G. C. Yalcin, V. Hagen-meyer, and B. Schäfer, Nonstandard power grid frequency statistics across continents, Scientific Reports 15 , 38470 (2025). [25] D. Kraljic, Towards Realistic Statistical Models of the Grid Frequency, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 38 , 256 (2023). [26] U. Oberhofer, L. R. Gorjao, G. C. Yalcin, O. Kamps, V. Ha-genmeyer, and B. Schafer, Non-linear, bivariate stochastic modelling of power-grid frequency applied to islands, in 

2023 IEEE Belgrade PowerTech (2023) pp. 1–1. [27] J. Kruse, E. Cramer, B. Schäfer, and D. Witthaut, Physics-Informed Machine Learning for Power Grid Frequency Mod-eling, PRX Energy 2, 043003 (2023). [28] L. Rydin Gorjão, R. Jumar, H. Maass, V. Hagenmeyer, G. C. Yalcin, J. Kruse, M. Timme, C. Beck, D. Witthaut, and B. Schäfer, Open access power-grid frequency database (2025). [29] T. Drewnick, X. Wen, U. Oberhofer, L. Rydin Gorjão, C. Beck, V. Hagenmeyer, and B. Schäfer, Analyzing deter-ministic and stochastic influences on the power grid fre-quency dynamics with explainable artificial intelligence, Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 

35 , 033153 (2025). [30] P. C. Böttcher, C. Hartmann, A. Benigni, T. Pesch, and D. Witthaut, Impact of Market Reforms on Deterministic Frequency Deviations in the European Power Grid (2026), arXiv:2602.09645 [physics.soc-ph]. [31] A. J. Wood, B. F. Wollenberg, and G. B. Sheblé, Power gen-eration, operation, and control (John wiley & sons, 2013). [32] J. Machowski, Z. Lubosny, J. W. Bialek, and J. R. Bumby, 

Power system dynamics: stability and control (John Wiley & Sons, 2020). [33] P. Kundur, Power system stability, Power system stability and control 10 , 7 (2007). [34] K. Mayer and S. Trück, Electricity markets around the world, Journal of Commodity Markets 9, 77 (2018). [35] K. Kashima, H. Aoyama, and Y. Ohta, Modeling and lin-earization of systems under heavy-tailed stochastic noise with application to renewable energy assessment, in 2015 54th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) 

(2015) pp. 1852–1857. 9

[36] D. Manik, M. Timme, and D. Witthaut, Cycle flows and multistability in oscillatory networks, Chaos: An Interdisci-plinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 27 , 083123 (2017). [37] B. Schäfer, M. Matthiae, X. Zhang, M. Rohden, M. Timme, and D. Witthaut, Escape routes, weak links, and desynchro-nization in fluctuation-driven networks, Phys. Rev. E 95 ,060203 (2017). [38] J. Hindes, P. Jacquod, and I. B. Schwartz, Network desyn-chronization by non-gaussian fluctuations, Phys. Rev. E 100 ,052314 (2019). [39] K. Schmietendorf, J. Peinke, and O. Kamps, The impact of turbulent renewable energy production on power grid stability and quality, The European Physical Journal B 90 ,222 (2017). [40] L. Tumash, S. Olmi, and E. Schöll, Effect of disorder and noise in shaping the dynamics of power grids, Europhysics Letters 123 , 20001 (2018). [41] NESO: National Energy System Operator, Dynamic Ser-vices (DC/DM/DR) (2025). [42] Ofgem, Decision on Dynamic Regulation, Dynamic Moder-ation, and Dynamic Containment in relation to an update to the Terms and Conditions related to Balancing (2023). [43] EPEX SPOT, Annual Trading Results of 2024 - Power Trad-ing on EPEX SPOT reaches all-time high (2024). [44] SAPP: Southern African Power Pool, SAPP Statistics 2020 (2020). [45] S. R. Conradie and L. J. M. Messerschmidt, A Symphony of Power: The Eskom Story (C. van Rensburg Publications, 2000). [46] CSIR Energy Research Centre, Utility-scale power genera-tion statistics in South Africa (2025). [47] International Energy Agency, South Africa Energy Mix (2024). [48] T. Janse van Rensburg and K. Morema, Reflections on load-shedding and potential GDP, South African Reserve Bank Occasional Bulletin of Economic Notes OBEN /23/01 2301 

(2023). [49] M. Makoni, Power cuts and South Africa’s health care, The Lancet 401 , 1413 (2023). [50] T. Greyling, S. Rossouw, and AFSTEREO, Gross national happiness.today index, http://gnh.today (2019). [51] NERSA: National Energy Regulator of South Africa, The South African Grid Code: 2022 (2022). [52] L. Rydin Gorjão and J. Maritz, The stochastic nature of power-grid frequency in south africa, Journal of Physics: Complexity 4, 015007 (2023). [53] J. Maritz, L. Rydin Gorjão, P. A. Bester, N. Esterhuy-sen, S. Erasmus, S. Riekert, R. Immelman, T. Geldenhuys, A. Viljoen, and C. Bodenstein, Data-Driven Modeling of Frequency Dynamics Observed in Operating Microgrids: A South African University Campus Case Study, IEEE Access 

12 , 14466 (2024). [54] C. Beck, Dynamical Foundations of Nonextensive Statistical Mechanics, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 , 180601 (2001). [55] C. Beck and E. G. D. Cohen, Superstatistics, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 322 , 267 (2003). [56] C. Beck, E. G. D. Cohen, and H. L. Swinney, From time series to superstatistics, Phys. Rev. E 72 , 056133 (2005). [57] H. Risken, Fokker-planck equation, in The Fokker-Planck equation: methods of solution and applications (Springer, 1989) pp. 63–95. [58] Y. G. Rebours, D. S. Kirschen, M. Trotignon, and S. Rossig-nol, A Survey of Frequency and Voltage Control Ancillary Services—Part I: Technical Features, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 22 , 350 (2007). [59] A. Ulbig, T. S. Borsche, and G. Andersson, Impact of low rotational inertia on power system stability and operation, IFAC Proceedings Volumes 47 , 7290 (2014). [60] P. Milan, M. Wächter, and J. Peinke, Turbulent Character of Wind Energy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110 , 138701 (2013). [61] D. Lamouroux and K. Lehnertz, Kernel-based regression of drift and diffusion coefficients of stochastic processes, Physics Letters A 373 , 3507 (2009). [62] L. Rydin Gorjão and F. Meirinhos, kramersmoyal: Kramers– Moyal coefficients for stochastic processes, Journal of Open Source Software 4, 1693 (2019). [63] H. Touchette and C. Beck, Asymptotics of superstatistics, Phys. Rev. E 71 , 016131 (2005). [64] R. W. Butler, Saddlepoint approximations with applications ,Vol. 22 (Cambridge University Press, 2007). [65] International Energy Agency, United Kindom Energy Mix (2024). [66] M. S. Almas, L. Vanfretti, R. S. Singh, and G. M. Jonsdot-tir, Vulnerability of synchrophasor-based wampac applica-tions’ to time synchronization spoofing, IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 9, 4601 (2018). [67] S. Redner, A guide to first-passage processes (Cambridge University Press, 2001). [68] B. B. Mandelbrot and J. W. Van Ness, Fractional brownian motions, fractional noises and applications, SIAM review 

10 , 422 (1968). [69] EPEX SPOT, Basics of the Power Market (2025). [70] G. Samoradnitsky, Stable non-Gaussian random processes: stochastic models with infinite variance (Routledge, 2017). [71] C. Tsallis, Possible generalization of Boltzmann-Gibbs statistics, Journal of Statistical Physics 52 , 479 (1988). 10 

# Supporting Information: Understanding the complexity of frequency and phase angle fluctuations in power grids   

> S1. DATA A. Data collection

Phasor Measurement Units (PMUs) are installed in Stellenbosch and Bloemfontein, South Africa, and in London and Glasgow, the United Kingdom. Each PMU measures electrical signals from the power grid and extracts frequencies 𝑓 𝑖 (𝑡 )

(equivalently, angular velocities 𝜔 𝑖 (𝑡 ) = 2𝜋 ( 𝑓 𝑖 (𝑡 ) − 𝑓 R), with 𝑓 R = 50 Hz ) and phase angles 𝜃 𝑖 (𝑡 ). We denote with the subscript 𝑖 the PMU installation sites, i.e., 𝑖 = Stellenbosch (SB), Bloemfontein (BF), London (LD), and Glasgow (GW). Since, during regular operations, 𝜔 𝑖 (𝑡 ) = 𝜔 (𝑡 ) for all 𝑖 in a grid, namely, only negligible fluctuations are observed in the frequency signal, we use frequency measurements from London and Stellenbosch to represent their respective countries. Phase angle differences are computed as 𝑥 (𝑡 ) = 𝜃 1 (𝑡 ) − 𝜃 2 (𝑡 ), with 𝜃 1 (𝑡 ) = 𝜃 LD (𝑡 ) and 𝜃 2 (𝑡 ) = 𝜃 GW (𝑡 ) in the United Kingdom, and 𝜃 1 (𝑡 ) = 𝜃 SB (𝑡 ) and 𝜃 2 (𝑡 ) = 𝜃 BF (𝑡 ) in South Africa. In practice, each PMU gives us discrete time frequency and phase-angle time series with a uniform resolution of 

Δ𝑡 PMU = 0.1 s . To retrieve these time series, it employs a Schmitt trigger that converts the grid voltage signal into a square wave, thereby mitigating noise. A frequency counter counts the number of oscillations 𝑁 0 of a high-precision reference frequency 𝑓 0 occurring between two successive square-wave edges at times 𝑡 . The reference frequency 𝑓 0 is synchronized with an atomic clock via GPS. The frequencies measurements are then calculated as 𝑓 𝑖 (𝑡 ) = 𝑓 0/𝑁 0, while the phase angles 

𝜃 𝑖 (𝑡 ) are computed from how much earlier or later the latest voltage zero crossing occurs compared to the ideal grid period. We query the PMUs via an API provided by Gridradar (https://gridradar.net) at 1-h intervals. For each hourly interval, we retrieve 36 thousand points since Δ𝑡 PMU = 0.1 s . Our data range from the 28th of April 2025 to the 28th of October 2025, yielding a total of 948 672 000 ≈ 950 million data points to work with. Extracting fine-grained, long-term measurements gives us an advantage over the literature, which typically reports frequencies measured every 1 s or more [10, 12, 16–18, 20, 24, 25, 27–29]. A coarser sampling interval might produce unimodal frequency distributions (for instance, see Schäfer et al. [12]) that fail to capture the features needed to fit and support our superstatistical model with nonlinear control.  

> B. Data processing

Phase angles yield “hard-to-spot” outliers. That is, spurious data that we would not have been able to detect by examining the 𝜃 1 (𝑡 ), 𝜃 2 (𝑡 ) in isolation, but only by analyzing 𝜃 1 (𝑡 ), 𝜃 2 (𝑡 ) against each other and their difference 𝑥 (𝑡 ).A first kind of “hard-to-spot” outlier is shown in Fig. S1, where a small percentage of the total measurements lies outside the phase-locked bands. We filter out these spurious data by manually trimming all values outside Δ1 ≤ 𝑥 ≤ Δ2. For the upper bands: United Kingdom: Δ1 = 0.58 rad South Africa: Δ1 = 0.85 rad 

Δ2 = 2.9 rad Δ2 = 1.9 rad .

For the lower bands: United Kingdom: Δ1 = −5.7 rad South Africa: Δ1 = −5.45 rad 

Δ2 = −3.4 rad Δ2 = −4.3 rad .

The total percentage of data points removed by manual filtering is less than 0.2% . This proportion is sufficiently small that it is not expected to affect our results. As a sanity check, we fit the upper diagonal bands of Fig. S1 with linear least squares. Since the angles are phase-locked, we expect the fit slope to be close to 𝑚 = 1. We find: United Kingdom: 𝑚 ≈ 0.969 South Africa: 𝑚 ≈ 0.997 .

A second kind of “hard-to-spot” outlier is shown in Fig. S2. In Fig. S2A, we show a snapshot of the signal 𝑥 (𝑡 ), which is zoomed over its first (approximately) minute and a half in Fig. S2B. The signal exhibits stepwise deviations from its profile. We attribute these deviations to PMU clock corrections [66]. Such corrections are typically introduced when phase angles cross a specific value, causing the artifacts to appear as discrete steps in 𝑥 (𝑡 ). It is difficult to filter out these corrections directly from 𝑥 (𝑡 ), as the time series are inherently noisy, making it challenging to systematically distinguish PMU corrections from genuine grid fluctuations. Nevertheless, to exclude artifacts, we use a simple yet effective solution and take the lower envelope of the signal. The envelope is computed using a mask with a width of 10 s and a stride of 

5 s . As shown in Fig. S2A, B, the lower envelope effectively removes the artifacts while preserving the signal profile. In Fig. S2C, we show the phase-angle-difference distribution and observe that the lower envelope preserves the overall shape of the histogram. 11 For consistency, we perform the same analysis with data from the United Kingdom. Results are shown in Fig. S4. Here, the signal is cleaner, with no step-like artifacts. The lower-envelope histogram deviates only slightly from the original data. We use the phase angle’s lower envelope to fit the tilted washboard potential in the main text. 0 π 2π  

> Phase angle θ(rad) GW
> 0
> π
> 2π
> Phase angle  θ (rad) LD

# A United Kingdom Linear fit Manual cutoff     

> 0π2π
> Phase angle θ(rad) BF
> 0
> π
> 2π
> Phase angle  θ (rad) SB

# B South Africa                 

> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> PDF
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> PDF
> FIG. S1. Trimming the phase-locked bands. Phase angles are phase-locked, as evidenced by the hexbin plots that form diagonal bands. Outliers outside Δ1≤𝑥 ≤Δ2are those points lying beyond the red diagonal lines. The upper bands are fitted. To visually verify the goodness of this fit, we plot the upper-band fit on the lower bands by opportunity shifting the line by 2𝜋 .(A) Data for the United Kingdom. To improve the visualization, we subsample the phase time series, taking one point every 10. (B) Data for South Africa. To improve the visualization, we subsample the phase time series, taking one point every 200.
> C. Data Validation

We verify that the shape of the distributions in Figs. 2B, E (main text) is consistent over time by splitting the frequency data into six non-overlapping monthly intervals. We show the distributions for each interval in Fig. S4 for the United Kingdom and Fig. S5 for South Africa. The histogram profiles are largely consistent, with deviations occurring only in the relative height of the peaks formed at the boundaries between control regions.  

> S2. FREQUENCY CONTROL

Control mechanisms enable modern power grids to stabilize their operation following disturbances. Multiple control levels typically operate on distinct time scales, with different objectives and magnitudes [32, 33, for an extensive overview]. A power grid consists of synchronous generators: large rotating machines that produce electrical power. Following a disturbance, such as a generator disconnection, the remaining generators supply additional power to compensate for the perturbation. This leads to a temporary reduction in their angular velocity and, consequently, in their kinetic energy. Control mechanisms then restore regular grid operation as follows. 1. Primary control starts acting within seconds. Contracted generators measure the frequency deviation from the nominal value and inject power proportional to the observed deviation, damping fast frequency fluctuations. 2. Secondary control acts on a slower time scale, typically minutes. It gradually restores the generator rotation to its reference frequency, correcting any steady-state deviation left by primary control. 3. On even longer time scales of minutes to hours, tertiary control may intervene. This, for instance, adjusts each generator’s target power output and ensures efficient electricity supply while maintaining adequate reserves. We focus on primary control only, which provides the fastest and strongest response to stabilize the grid. We model it as a (nonlinear) continuous piecewise function [8, 15, 25].  

> A. Control in the United Kingdom

In the United Kingdom, primary control is exerted through two mechanisms: “Dynamic Regulation” and “Dynamic Moderation” [41, 42]. The former linearly damps deviations by providing a linear power response to frequency deviations up to 0.2 Hz . The latter gives an additional linear response for deviations between 0.1 Hz and 0.2 Hz . Control is activated 12 South Africa 00:00 00:30 01:00 01:30 02:00 02:30 Time (hh:mm) 1.30 1.35 1.40 

> Phase angle diff. x (rad)

# A      

> Original signal Lower envelope 00:00:00 00:00:30 00:01:00 00:01:30 Time (hh:mm:ss) 1.31 1.32 1.33 1.34
> Phase angle diff. x (rad)

# B    

> 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 Phase angle diff. x (rad) 01234
> PDF
> π
> 2

# C  

> Original signal Lower envelope

FIG. S2. Processing the phase-angle difference for South Africa. (A) A snapshot of the original signal 𝑥 (𝑡 ) is shown together with its lower envelope. (B) Panel A is zoomed in to approximately the first 1.5 min . (C) The distribution of the original signal 𝑥 (𝑡 ) and its lower envelope is plotted. The lower envelope is used to fit the tilted washboard potential described in the main text. The distribution mode lies well below 𝜋 /2, which is the boundary of the stability region allowed by the tilted washboard potential (see Fig. S12B and Sec. S10). Therefore, MLE yields a good fit. 

to a finite precision of 0.015 Hz [58], creating a deadband with no damping around the reference frequency. This scenario is accurately described by the nonlinear function 𝐻 (𝜔 ) drawn in Fig. 2F (main text) and defined in Eq. 8 (main text). Here, the numerical values of the boundaries between control regions are 

𝜔 0 = 2𝜋 · 0.015 rad /s (S1) United Kingdom: 𝜔 1 = 2𝜋 · 0.1 rad /s

𝜔 2 = 2𝜋 · 0.2 rad /s .

In the United Kingdom, a post-fault control mechanism, called “Dynamic Control”, is also activated when deviations exceed 0.2 Hz . We can safely ignore it in our models, as we collect data during routine grid operations that rarely exceed this value. Note, indeed, that the tails of the frequency distribution rarely extend beyond 0.2 Hz , as shown in Fig. 2G (main text). These large deviations are consistent with the description above, which specifies the nominal regulation bands of primary control. Control continues to operate beyond these bands, albeit possibly nonlinearly or partially. 13 United Kingdom 00:00 00:30 01:00 01:30 02:00 02:30 Time (hh:mm) 0.95 1.00 1.05 1.10 1.15 

> Phase angle diff. x (rad)

# A      

> Original signal Lower envelope 00:00:00 00:00:30 00:01:00 00:01:30 Time (hh:mm:ss) 0.960 0.965 0.970 0.975
> Phase angle diff. x (rad)

# B       

> 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 Phase angle diff. x (rad) 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25
> PDF
> π
> 2

# C  

> Original signal Lower envelope

FIG. S3. Processing the phase-angle difference for the United Kingdom. See Fig. S2 for a full caption. (C) Note that the distribution mode and a large portion of the distribution lie well above 𝜋 /2, which is the boundary of the stability region allowed by the tilted washboard potential (see Fig. S12B and Sec. S10). Consequently, the tilted washboard model is insufficient to describe or fit the data. In practice, MLE becomes unstable: as the distribution mode approaches 𝜋 /2, the tilted washboard potential 𝑉 (𝑥 ) flattens (see Fig. S12A) and the data cannot be accurately captured by Eq. (S82). 

B. Control in South Africa 

Control in South Africa is less strict than in the United Kingdom. The first layer of primary control is provided by generators contracted with ESKOM, the country’s main electricity utility. These generators provide an “Instantaneous Reserve” [51], acting within 10 s to counter deviations exceeding 0.15 Hz . Unlike in the United Kingdom, these generators are not tasked with actively damping all deviations within a range, specifically between the deadband and 0.15 Hz . Instead, they are bound to respond only when the frequency deviation exceeds 0.15 Hz , leaving the region between the deadband and 0.15 Hz more loosely regulated than its corresponding region in the United Kingdom. The second layer of control is provided by additional non-contracted generators, which respond to deviations between 0.15 Hz and 0.5 Hz .This staggered control makes frequency damping irregular in practice: for deviations below 0.15 Hz , different generators may respond at different thresholds. Still, for simplicity, we model control as piecewise linear with three distinct regions. Linear control in the 0.015 -0.15 Hz region can be interpreted as a net effect of the heterogeneous generator response. Accordingly, we set the control boundaries in South Africa as 

𝜔 0 = 2𝜋 · 0.015 rad /s (S2) South Africa: 𝜔 1 = 2𝜋 · 0.15 rad /s

𝜔 2 = 2𝜋 · 0.5 rad /s .

This simplified control model facilitates numerical tractability while still capturing the essential features of the distri-14 Angular velocity ω (rad/s) 

> PDF

United Kingdom 

−ω 2 −ω 1 ±ω0 ω1 ω2

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 28 Apr 2025 28 May 2025 N ≈ 25.9M 

−ω 2 −ω 1 ±ω 0 ω1 ω2      

> 28 May 2025 28 Jun 2025 N≈26.8M

−ω 2 −ω 1 ±ω0 ω 1 ω2      

> 28 Jun 2025 28 Jul 2025 N≈25.9M

−3.0 −1.5 0.0 1.5 3.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 28 Jul 2025 28 Aug 2025 N ≈ 26.8M 

−3.0 −1.5 0.0 1.5 3.0       

> 28 Aug 2025 28 Sep 2025 N≈26.8M

−3.0 −1.5 0.0 1.5 3.0       

> 28 Sep 2025 28 Oct 2025 N≈25.9M

FIG. S4. Monthly frequency distributions for the United Kingdom. Each panel spans one month of measurements, and the windows are non-overlapping. Here, 𝑁 denotes the number of data points used for each histogram. The vertical lines denoting control boundaries are as per Eq. (S1). Angular velocity ω (rad/s) 

> PDF

South Africa 

−ω 2 −ω 1 ±ω0 ω1 ω2

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 28 Apr 2025 28 May 2025 N ≈ 25.5M 

−ω 2 −ω 1 ±ω 0 ω1 ω 2      

> 28 May 2025 28 Jun 2025 N≈26.8M

−ω 2 −ω 1 ±ω0 ω1 ω2      

> 28 Jun 2025 28 Jul 2025 N≈25.9M

−3.0 −1.5 0.0 1.5 3.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 28 Jul 2025 28 Aug 2025 N ≈ 26.7M 

−3.0 −1.5 0.0 1.5 3.0       

> 28 Aug 2025 28 Sep 2025 N≈26.8M

−3.0 −1.5 0.0 1.5 3.0       

> 28 Sep 2025 28 Oct 2025 N≈25.9M

FIG. S5. Monthly frequency distributions for South Africa. Each panel spans one month of measurements, and the windows are non-overlapping. Here, 𝑁 denotes the number of data points used for each histogram. The vertical lines denoting control boundaries are as per Eq. (S2). 

butions shown in Figs. 2B, E (main text). In the South African frequency distribution, the deadband dip appears less pronounced than in the United Kingdom. This difference may be attributed to the staggered activation of generators. The discontinuity between control regimes at ±𝜔 2 in South Africa manifests as a secondary peak in the tails of the frequency histogram in Fig. 2G (main text), similar to the peaks observed at ±𝜔 1. However, too few data preclude a reliable MLE fit. 

S3. POWER MARKETS IN THE UNITED KINGDOM AND SOUTH AFRICA 

Power grids worldwide operate within various energy markets, each with its own rules and trading mechanisms. In the United Kingdom, energy trading occurs through Nominated Electricity Market Operators (NEMOs), which are 15 regulated by the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets (Ofgem). NEMOs include the European Power Exchange (EPEX SPOT) SE and Nord Pool AS, operating across different geographical areas of Europe. Similar to most electricity markets worldwide, these markets allow for both day-ahead and intraday trading. Intraday transactions occur in fixed intervals every 15 min and 30 min [69]. Large transactions every 30 min are visible in the frequency time series Fig. 2A (main text). South Africa is the leading country of the Southern African Power Pool (SAPP), a regional cooperation that connects national grids in Southern Africa to facilitate cross-border electricity trade. SAPP also allows both day-ahead and intraday trading, with the intraday market operating on 1 h intervals [44]. These transactions can be seen in Fig. 2D (main text). To better visualize the contribution of market transactions to the frequency time series, we compute the Rate Of Change Of Frequency (ROCOF) for the signal aggregated over 24 h . This is defined as the finite-difference derivative ROCOF (𝑡 ) = Δ 𝜔 /Δ𝑡 PMU := (𝜔 (𝑡 + Δ𝑡 PMU ) − 𝜔 (𝑡 ))/ Δ𝑡 PMU . We display it over time windows centered around market transaction events in both countries in Figs. S6-S7. Measuring its value exactly at transaction times, taking its absolute value, and averaging, we obtain United Kingdom: |ROCOF (𝑡 = transaction )| = 0.03 ± 0.02 rad /s2 (S3) South Africa: |ROCOF (𝑡 = transaction )| = 0.007 ± 0.004 rad /s2 . (S4) The United Kingdom values are consistent with similar estimates reported in the literature [18]. The relatively high standard deviations in Eqs. (S3)-(S4) arise from the strong variability in the magnitude of power transactions throughout the day, as shown in Figs. S6-S7 and Figs. 2A, D (main text). For example, in the United Kingdom, between 2:30 and 5:30 p.m., market transactions exhibit smaller ROCOF spikes in Fig. S6 because the influence of heterogeneous consumer loads dominates the frequency profile (Fig. 2A (main text)). In South Africa, the frequency time series is less regular than in the United Kingdom, which explains the lower magnitude of the ROCOF estimate in Eq. (S4). Time before/after market transaction (s)                                                      

> ROCOF (rad/s ) 2
> United Kingdom
> −0.02 0.00
> 00:30 01:00 01:30 02:00 02:30 03:00
> −0.025 0.000
> 03:30 04:00 04:30 05:00 05:30 06:00
> 0.00 0.05
> 06:30 07:00 07:30 08:00 08:30 09:00
> −0.025 0.000
> 09:30 10:00 10:30 11:00 11:30 12:00
> −0.05 0.00
> 12:30 13:00 13:30 14:00 14:30 15:00
> −0.01 0.00
> 15:30 16:00 16:30 17:00 17:30 18:00
> −0.02 0.00
> 18:30 19:00 19:30 20:00 20:30 21:00
> -30 030
> −0.025 0.000
> 21:30
> -30 030
> 22:00
> -30 030
> 22:30
> -30 030
> 23:00
> -30 030
> 23:30
> -30 030
> 00:00
> Avg before dispatch Avg after dispatch

FIG. S6. United Kingdom ROCOF around market transactions. The ROCOF is computed using finite-difference derivatives. We show data for 48 windows of 1 min , spanning 30 s before each energy market transaction, recorded every 30 min daily. The red and blue lines show the average ROCOF for the 30 s before and after the transaction. 16 Time before/after market transaction (s)                                  

> ROCOF (rad/s ) 2
> South Africa
> −0.025 0.000 0.025
> 01:00 02:00 03:00 04:00 05:00 06:00
> 0.000 0.025
> 07:00 08:00 09:00 10:00 11:00 12:00
> −0.01 0.00 0.01
> 13:00 14:00 15:00 16:00 17:00 18:00
> -30 030
> −0.02 0.00
> 19:00
> -30 030
> 20:00
> -30 030
> 21:00
> -30 030
> 22:00
> -30 030
> 23:00
> -30 030
> 00:00
> Avg before dispatch Avg after dispatch

FIG. S7. South Africa ROCOF around market transactions. The ROCOF is computed using finite-difference derivatives. We show data for 48 windows of 1 min , spanning 30 s before each energy market transaction, recorded every 1 h daily. The red and blue lines show the average ROCOF for the 30 s before and after the transaction. 

S4. DERIVATION OF THE AGGREGATED SWING EQUATIONS 

We derive the aggregated swing equation in Eq. 1 (main text) from Eqs. 5-6 (main text). The swing equations read, for each generator 𝑖 = 1, . . . , 𝑁 ,

d𝜃 𝑖 

d𝑡 = 𝜔 𝑖 (S5) 

𝑀 𝑖 

d𝜔 𝑖 

d𝑡 = 𝐻 𝑖 (𝜔 𝑖 ) + 𝑃 𝑖 (𝑡 ) + 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝐾 𝑖 𝑗 sin (𝜃 𝑗 − 𝜃 𝑖 ) + 𝜖 𝑖 𝜉 𝑖 . (S6) We focus on Eq. (S6). We define the bulk angular velocity as 

𝜔 (𝑡 ) := 1

𝑀 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝑀 𝑖 𝜔 𝑖 (𝑡 ) 𝑀 :=

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝑀 𝑖 .

During regular operation, 𝜔 𝑖 (𝑡 ) = 𝜔 (𝑡 ) for all 𝑖 . Therefore, we aim to derive a single aggregate equation from Eq. (S6), controlling 𝜔 (𝑡 ) instead of 𝑁 separate equations for each 𝜔 𝑖 (𝑡 ). The bulk angular velocity can be recovered on the left-hand side of Eq. (S6) by summing over 𝑖 and dividing by 𝑀 :

d𝜔 

d𝑡 = 1

𝑀 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝐻 𝑖 (𝜔 𝑖 ) + 1

𝑀 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝑃 𝑖 (𝑡 ) + 1

𝑀 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1
> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝐾 𝑖 𝑗 sin (𝜃 𝑗 − 𝜃 𝑖 ) + 1

𝑀 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝜖 𝑖 𝜉 𝑖 . (S7) To simplify Eq. (S7), we make two standard constructive assumptions [11, 12]. First, we take a uniform damping-to-inertia ratio across all control regions for all generators. Let 

Ω0 := {𝜔 : |𝜔 | ≤ 𝜔 0 } (S8) 

Ω1 := {𝜔 : 𝜔 0 < |𝜔 | ≤ 𝜔 1 } (S9) 

Ω2 := {𝜔 : |𝜔 | > 𝜔 1 } (S10) denote the deadband, the inner control region, and the outer control region of Fig. 2F (main text), which we assume are the same size for all generators 𝑖 . Taking a constant damping-to-inertia ratio amounts to having 

𝐻 𝑖 (𝜔 𝑖 ) := −sgn (| 𝜔 𝑖 |) ℎ𝑖 (| 𝜔 𝑖 |) 

ℎ𝑖 (𝑥 ) :=



0 𝑥 ∈ Ω0

𝐷 1,𝑖 (𝑥 − 𝜔 0) 𝑥 ∈ Ω1

𝐷 2,𝑖 (𝑥 − 𝜔 1) + 𝐷 1,𝑖 (𝜔 1 − 𝜔 0) 𝑥 ∈ Ω2 .17 satisfy for all 𝑖 𝛾 1 := 𝐷 1,𝑖 

𝑀 𝑖 

(S11) 

𝛾 2 := 𝐷 2,𝑖 

𝑀 𝑖 

, (S12) where 𝐷 1,𝑖 and 𝐷 2,𝑖 are the damping coefficients of the two control regions specific to each generator. Eqs. (S11)-(S12) imply 

1

𝑀 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝐻 𝑖 (𝜔 𝑖 ) = 1

𝑀 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝑀 𝑖 𝐻 (𝜔 𝑖 )

= 𝐻 1

𝑀 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝑀 𝑖 𝜔 𝑖 

!

(S13) 

= 𝐻 (𝜔 ) . (S14) Here, 𝐻 (𝜔 ) = −sgn (𝜔 ) ℎ(| 𝜔 |) and ℎ(| 𝜔 |) is defined as in Eq. 8 (main text). 𝐻 (𝜔 ) has coefficients independent of 𝑖 and is piecewise linear, hence the step in Eq. (S13) is valid. Second, we assume a symmetric coupling satisfying for all 𝑖, 𝑗 :

𝐾 𝑖 𝑗 = 𝐾 𝑗𝑖 . (S15) Putting Eqs. (S14)-(S15) together, and substituting 𝑃 (𝑡 ) as defined in Eq. 7 (main text) gives Eq. 1 (main text). Indeed, Eq. (S6) becomes 

d𝜔 

d𝑡 = 𝐻 (𝜔 ) + 𝑃 (𝑡 ) + 1

𝑀 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝜖 𝑖 𝜉 𝑖 , (S16) where the sine contributions in Eq. (S16) vanish because of Eq. (S15). To conclude, we are only left to evaluate the noise. Assuming that the Gaussian random variables 𝜉 𝑖 ∼ N ( 0, 1) are i.i.d. allows us to sum their contribution to define 

𝜖 = 1

𝑀 

vut 𝑁 ∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝜖 2

> 𝑖

𝜉 ∼ N ( 0, 1) . (S17) This last step completes the derivation.  

> S5. MODELING NOISE FOR POWER GRID DYNAMICS

We assume the noise 𝜉 in Eq. 1 (main text) to be Gaussian white noise, as specified by Eq. (S17). This choice is convenient, as it allows us to carry forward analytical derivations for both the frequency distribution and the autocorrelation. Gaussian white noise alone, however, cannot reproduce heavy-tailed empirical distributions. To account for these, we introduce a slowly varying driving term, 𝑃 (𝑡 ), and employ superstatistics. Alternatives adopted in the literature include replacing Gaussian noise with non-Gaussian (Lévy) noise to capture heavy-tailed frequency fluctuations, or using superstatistics with Gaussian white noise but assuming the control coefficient not constant [9, 10, 12, 17, 19, 35]. These approaches lead to Lévy-stable [70] and 𝑞 -Gaussian distributions [71] for 

𝑝 (𝜔 ), respectively. While such distributions successfully capture heavy tails, they have been studied without accounting for the nonlinearity of control to maintain analytical tractability. Therefore, they do not adequately describe multimodal frequency distributions. Works incorporating nonlinear control have thus far relied exclusively on numerical simulations [15, 26], precluding direct data fitting. Interestingly, yet only with simulations, fractional Lévy noise has been employed to capture heavy tails, multimodality, and slow autocorrelation decays at long time lags [25, as well as Sec. S8, Fig. S10B], all of which are features observed in high-resolution frequency measures.  

> S6. ANALYTICAL DERIVATIONS OF THE FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION

We derive Eq. 10 (main text). We begin with the Fokker–Planck equation 

𝜕 𝑓 𝜕𝑡 = − 𝜕 𝜕𝜔 [( 𝐻 (𝜔 ) + 𝑃 ) 𝑓 ] + 𝜖 2

2

𝜕 2 𝑓 𝜕𝜔 2 ,18 which follows from the aggregated swing equation in Eq. 1 (main text) and is valid for short time intervals during which the slow power can be treated as constant, i.e., 𝑃 (𝑡 ) = 𝑃 . We impose “stationarity”, 𝜕 𝑓 /𝜕𝑡 = 0, which is also meaningful only over short time intervals. This yields 

𝜕 𝜕𝜔 [( 𝐻 (𝜔 ) + 𝑃 ) 𝑓 ] = 𝜖 2

2

𝜕 2 𝑓 𝜕𝜔 2 . (S18) Integrating Eq. (S18) twice, we obtain its general solution, namely 

𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) = 1

𝑍 exp (− Φ(𝜔 |𝑃 )) (S19) 

Φ(𝜔 |𝑃 ) := − 2

𝜖 2

∫

(𝐻 (𝜔 ) + 𝑃 ) d𝜔 . (S20) We set to zero the integration constant arising from the first integration of Eq. (S18) by assuming 𝜕 𝑓 /𝜕𝜔 = 0 as 𝜔 → ±∞ .Before beginning the calculations, we illustrate how the distribution and the potential in Eqs. (S19)-(S20) change with their parameters. We show in Fig. S8B the potential Φ(𝜔 | 𝑃 ) that has a single well whose minimum yields the most probable frequency. If 𝑃 = 0, then Φ(𝜔 | 𝑃 ) is symmetric the minimum is at 𝜔 = 0. Physically, Φ(𝜔 | 𝑃 ) can be interpreted as a potential energy arising from the control 𝐻 (𝜔 ) in Fig. S8A and the mechanical power 𝑃 . The noise amplitude 𝜖 

controls the width of the potential, as shown in Fig. S8C, and thereby the spread of the distribution 𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ).With superstatistics, the multimodality observed in frequency histograms can be understood as a superposition of the single-well states described by 𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ). Such an explanation has been noted before in the literature [24], but has not been formalized before our work. We draw 𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) in Fig. S8D. The shape of 𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) is an exponential distribution modulated by 𝑃 in Ω0 (uniform when 𝑃 = 0), joined to two Gaussian branches in Ω1 and Ω2. The effect of piecewise linear control is to damp the Gaussian branches more strongly in the in Ω2 than in Ω1.To get closed-form expressions, we integrate Eq. (S20) separately over the three control regions Ω0, Ω1, and Ω2 in Eqs. (S8)-(S10). Then, we impose continuity between each expression of 𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) at ±𝜔 0 and ±𝜔 1. Finally, we compute the normalization 𝑍 in the deadband and observe that the normalization in the linearly damped regions Ω1, Ω2 does not admit an elementary closed-form solution. We write all calculations in detail, the final results are summarized in Eqs. (S31)-(S32) for the continuity constants, and Eq. (S33) for the normalization.  

> A. Fokker–Planck Integrals

In the deadband Ω0, there is no damping. Therefore Eqs. (S19)-(S20) give 

𝑓 0 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) ∝ exp 

 2𝑃 𝜖 2 𝜔 



, (S21) where we introduced the convention 𝑓 0 (𝜔 |𝑃 ) = 𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) for 𝜔 ∈ Ω0 (and will do analogously for the control region Ω1,

Ω2). In Ω1, the control function takes the form 𝐻 (𝜔 ) = −𝛾 1sgn (𝜔 ) (| 𝜔 | − 𝜔 0), i.e., it is separately affine on the two branches with 𝜔 > 0 and 𝜔 < 0. As a result, Φ(𝜔 | 𝑃 ) is quadratic and Eq. (S19) becomes Gaussian. Formally, 

𝑓 1 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) ∝ exp 

 2

𝜖 2

∫

(− 𝛾 1 sgn (𝜔 ) (| 𝜔 | − 𝜔 0) + 𝑃 ) d𝜔 



= exp 

 2

𝜖 2

∫

(− 𝛾 1 (𝜔 − sgn (𝜔 ) 𝜔 0) + 𝑃 ) d𝜔 



= exp 

 2

𝜖 2



−𝛾 1

 𝜔 2

2 − | 𝜔 | 𝜔 0



+ 𝑃𝜔 

  

∝ exp 

 2

𝜖 2

h

− 𝛾 1

2 (𝜔 − sgn (𝜔 ) 𝜔 0)2 + 𝑃𝜔 

i 

(S22) 

∝ exp 

"

− 𝛾 1

𝜖 2



𝜔 − sgn (𝜔 ) 𝜔 0 − 𝑃 𝛾 1

2#

. (S23) In Eq. (S22), we completed the squares in the innermost parentheses. Similarly, in Eq. (S23), we completed the squares in the squared brackets. Defining Λ1 = Λ 1 (sgn (𝜔 ) , 𝑃 ) as in Eq. 11 (main text) gives 

𝑓 1 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) ∝ exp 

h

− 𝛾 1

𝜖 2 (𝜔 − Λ1)2i

. (S24) 19 Angular velocity (rad/s)      

> 210012
> 3
> 2
> 1
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> Primary control H(  ) (rad/s 2)

# A     

> 210012
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> Potential  ( | P)

# B P = 0.6        

> P = 0.3
> P = 0.1
> P = 0
> P = 0.1
> P = 0.3
> P = 0.6
> 210012
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> Potential  ( | P)

# C = 0.3      

> = 0.35
> = 2
> 210012
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> PDF f(  | P)

# D

FIG. S8. Nonlinear control, potential, and PDF. For all panels, the axes are arbitrarily scaled. The damping coefficients are conventionally set to 𝛾 1 = 0.75 and 𝛾 2 = 0.4. Control regions are separated by ±𝜔 0, ±𝜔 1, and ±𝜔 2 as in Eq. (S1). (A) Nonlinear control function 

𝐻 (𝜔 ) as in Fig. 2F (main text). (B) Potential Φ(𝜔 | 𝑃 ) obtained by integrating 𝐻 (𝜔 ) as per Eq. (S20). We plot the potential as a function of 𝑃 while conventionally fixing 𝜖 = 0.3. When integrating the control function, we choose arbitrary integration constants to ensure the continuity of Φ(𝜔 | 𝑃 ). (C) Potential Φ(𝜔 | 𝑃 ) as 𝜖 varies. We focus on the single value 𝑃 = 0.3, as the shrinking effect of 

𝜖 is qualitatively identical for all 𝑃 . (D) PDF 𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) for the non-negative values of 𝑃 in panel B. The color scheme matches that of panel B. Here, the integration constants are as in Eqs. (S31)-(S32), namely, they are set to ensure the continuity of 𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ). The PDF is normalized numerically. 

In Ω2, control is again separately affine for 𝜔 > 0, 𝜔 < 0 and of the form 𝐻 (𝜔 ) =

−sgn (𝜔 ) [ 𝛾 2 (| 𝜔 | − 𝜔 1) + 𝛾 1 (𝜔 1 − 𝜔 0)] . Once again Eq. (S19), becomes a Gaussian distribution. In detail, 

𝑓 2 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) ∝ exp 

 2

𝜖 2

∫

{− sgn (𝜔 ) [ 𝛾 2 (| 𝜔 | − 𝜔 1) + 𝛾 1 (𝜔 1 − 𝜔 0)] + 𝑃 } d𝜔 



= exp 

 2

𝜖 2

∫

{− [ 𝛾 2 (𝜔 − sgn (𝜔 ) 𝜔 1) + 𝛾 1 sgn (𝜔 ) Δ] + 𝑃 } d𝜔 



(S25) 

= exp 

 2

𝜖 2



−



𝛾 2

 𝜔 2

2 − | 𝜔 |𝜔 1



+ 𝛾 1 |𝜔 |Δ



+ 𝑃𝜔 

 

= exp 

 2

𝜖 2

h

− 𝛾 2

2 𝜔 2 + ( 𝛾 2 sgn (𝜔 ) 𝜔 1 − 𝛾 1 sgn (𝜔 ) Δ + 𝑃 )𝜔 

i 

. (S26) In Eq. (S25) we introduced Δ := 𝜔 1 − 𝜔 0. To further unclutter notation, we defined Λ2 = Λ 1 (sgn (𝜔 ) , 𝑃 ) as in Eq. 12 (main text), which is constant over the two branches 𝜔 > 0 and 𝜔 < 0, and therefore can be treated as constant when completing the squares. Substituting it into Eq. (S26) gives 

𝑓 2 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) ∝ exp 

 2

𝜖 2



− 𝛾 2

2 𝜔 2 + 𝛾 2Λ2𝜔 



.

We complete the squares again to get 

𝑓 2 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) ∝ exp 

h

− 𝛾 2

𝜖 2 (𝜔 − Λ2)2i

. (S27) Eq. (S21), Eq. (S24), and Eq. (S27) correspond the right-hand side of Eq. 10 (main text) without the continuity factors 20 and normalization constant. Using the notation of Eqs. (S19)-(S20), we may write the potential 

Φ(𝜔 |𝑃 ) =



− 2𝑃 𝜖 2 𝜔 𝜔 ∈ Ω0

𝛾 1

𝜖 2 (𝜔 − Λ1)2 𝜔 ∈ Ω1

𝛾 2

𝜖 2 (𝜔 − Λ2)2 𝜔 ∈ Ω2 .

(S28) 

B. Continuity Factors 

We impose the continuity of 𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) at ±𝜔 0 and ±𝜔 1 for all values of 𝑃 . Formally, using the inequality conventions of Eqs. (S8)-(S10), we impose 

𝑓 0 (𝜔 0 | 𝑃 ) = lim 

> 𝜔 →𝜔 +
> 0

𝑓 1 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) 𝑓 0 (− 𝜔 0 | 𝑃 ) = lim  

> 𝜔 →− 𝜔 −
> 0

𝑓 1 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) (S29) 

𝑓 1 (𝜔 1 | 𝑃 ) = lim 

> 𝜔 →𝜔 +
> 1

𝑓 2 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) 𝑓 1 (− 𝜔 1 | 𝑃 ) = lim  

> 𝜔 →− 𝜔 −
> 1

𝑓 2 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) . (S30) Eqs. (S29)-(S30) return two multiplicative constants 𝐶 1 = 𝐶 1 (sgn (𝜔 ) , 𝑃 ), 𝐶 2 = 𝐶 2 (sgn (𝜔 ) , 𝑃 ) to scale 𝑓 1 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ),

𝑓 2 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ), respectively, and obtain a continuous distribution 𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) over all 𝜔 .Continuity at ±𝜔 0, i.e., Eq. (S29), gives 

exp 



± 2𝑃 𝜖 2 𝜔 0



= 𝐶 1 (± 1, 𝑃 ) exp 

"

− 𝛾 1

𝜖 2



±𝜔 0 ∓ 𝜔 0 − 𝑃 𝛾 1

2#

.

Rearranging terms, we obtain 

𝐶 1 (± 1, 𝑃 ) = exp 



± 2𝑃 𝜖 2 𝜔 0

  

exp 



− 𝑃 2

𝛾 1𝜖 2



= exp 



± 2𝑃 𝜖 2 𝜔 0 + 𝑃 2

𝛾 1𝜖 2



.

Continuity at ±𝜔 1, i.e, Eq. (S30), yields an analogous derivation. This time 𝐶 1 and 𝐶 2 must obey 

𝐶 1 (± 1, 𝑃 ) exp 



− 𝛾 1

𝜖 2 (± 𝜔 1 − Λ1)2

= 𝐶 2 (± 1, 𝑃 ) exp 



− 𝛾 2

𝜖 2 (± 𝜔 1 − Λ2)2

where, we employed Λ1 and Λ2 to ease notation. Rearranging terms and using Δ := 𝜔 1 − 𝜔 0, we obtain 

𝐶 2 (± 1, 𝑃 ) = 𝐶 1 (± 1, 𝑃 ) exp 



− 𝛾 1

𝜖 2 (± 𝜔 1 − Λ1)2 

exp 



− 𝛾 2

𝜖 2 (± 𝜔 1 − Λ2)2

= 𝐶 1 (± 1, 𝑃 ) exp 

"

− 𝛾 1

𝜖 2



±Δ − 𝑃 𝛾 1

2# 

exp 

"

− 𝛾 2

𝜖 2



± 𝛾 1

𝛾 2

Δ − 𝑃 𝛾 2

2#

= 𝐶 1 (± 1, 𝑃 ) exp 

"

− 𝛾 1

𝜖 2



±Δ − 𝑃 𝛾 1

2

+ 𝛾 2

𝜖 2



± 𝛾 1

𝛾 2

Δ − 𝑃 𝛾 2

2#

.

In summary, 𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) is continuous for 

𝐶 1 (sgn (𝜔 ), 𝑃 ) = exp 



sgn (𝜔 ) 2𝑃 𝜔 0

𝜖 2 + 𝑃 2

𝛾 1𝜖 2



(S31) 

𝐶 2 (sgn (𝜔 ), 𝑃 ) = 𝐶 1 (sgn (𝜔 ), 𝑃 ) exp 

"

− 𝛾 1

𝜖 2



sgn (𝜔 ) ( 𝜔 1 − 𝜔 0) − 𝑃 𝛾 1

2

+ 𝛾 2

𝜖 2

 𝛾 1

𝛾 2

sgn (𝜔 ) ( 𝜔 1 − 𝜔 0) − 𝑃 𝛾 2

2#

. (S32) 

C. Normalization Constant 

To conclude our derivation of 𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ), we are left with the calculation of 𝑍 = 𝑍 (𝑃 ). Again, we divide the discussion into three parts for Ω0, Ω1, and Ω2, and express 𝑍 as the sum 𝑍 = 𝑍 0 + 𝑍 1 + 𝑍 2.21 In the deadband, we separate the two cases where 𝑃 ≠ 0 and 𝑃 = 0. In the former, we evaluate 𝑍 0 as follows 

𝑍 0 =

∫ 𝜔 0 

> −𝜔 0

exp 

 2𝑃 𝜖 2 𝜔 



d𝜔 

= 𝜖 2

2𝑃 



exp 

 2𝑃 𝜖 2 𝜔 0



− exp 



− 2𝑃 𝜖 2 𝜔 0

 

= 𝜖 2

𝑃 sinh 

 2𝑃 𝜖 2 𝜔 0



.

In the latter, instead, 𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) is constant, hence 

𝑍 0 = 2𝜔 0 .

Combining the two cases, we obtain 

𝑍 0 =



𝜖 2

𝑃 sinh 

 2𝑃 𝜖 2 𝜔 0



𝑃 ≠ 02𝜔 0 𝑃 = 0 .

(S33) In Ω1 and Ω2, the integration of 𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) yields the Gaussian integrals 

𝑍 1 =

∫

> Ω1

𝐶 1 (sgn (𝜔 ) , 𝑃 ) exp 

h

− 𝛾 1

𝜖 2 (𝜔 − Λ1 (sgn (𝜔 ) , 𝑃 )) 2i

d𝜔 (S34) 

𝑍 2 =

∫

> Ω2

𝐶 2 (sgn (𝜔 ) , 𝑃 ) exp 

h

− 𝛾 2

𝜖 2 (𝜔 − Λ2 (sgn (𝜔 ) , 𝑃 )) 2i

d𝜔 . (S35) over bounded domains. One can carry calculations further to obtain a normalization factor 𝑍 that depends on the error function erf (𝑥 ) := 2

√𝜋 

∫ 𝑥 

> 0

𝑒 −𝑡 2

d𝑡 . 

However, for our discussion, it is sufficient to note that 𝑍 cannot be expressed in terms of elementary functions due to the dependence on 𝑍 1 and 𝑍 2. To proceed with further analytical results, we resort to approximations.   

> S7. FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION: DEADBAND, PEAKS AT CONTROL BOUNDARIES, HEAVY TAILS A. Deadband

For large values of 𝑃 , the distribution 𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) is concentrated away from the deadband Ω0. To get an intuition of how large 𝑃 should be we assume 𝑃 > 0 (the case 𝑃 < 0 is analogous) and impose 

Λ1 (1, 𝑃 ) ≥ 𝜔 0 + 𝜎 1 , (S36) where 𝜎 1 = 𝜖 /√︁ 2𝛾 1 is the standard deviation of 𝑓 1 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ). In other words, we search for the values of 𝑃 such that the Gaussian 𝑓 1 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) is centered at least one standard deviation beyond the control boundary 𝜔 0. Substituting the full expression of Λ1 into Eq. (S36) yields 

𝑃 ≥ 𝑃 𝑐 := 𝜖 √︂ 𝛾 1

2 . (S37) indicating that any power fluctuations larger than 𝑃 𝑐 might suffice to suppress the deadband contribution 𝑓 0 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) of 

𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ). Consequently, to model the deadband, we choose 𝑃 to be arbitrarily small, for example |𝑃 | ≤ 𝛿 /2 with 𝛿 /2 ≪ 𝑃 𝑐 ,and assume 𝑍 to be constant. We get a numerical estimate of 𝑃 𝑐 in the right-hand side of Eq. (S37) for the United Kingdom, where we perform MLE. The parameter 𝜖 is obtained via KR (Eq. (S72)), and 𝛾 1 is computed by fitting the frequency autocorrelation (Eq. (S58), we use the single-exponential fit as it gives an effectively identical parameter to the double-exponential one but with lower standard deviation). This gives 𝑃 𝑐 = (7 ± 2) · 10 −5 rad /s2.Taking the normalization 𝑍 to be constant allows us to carry out analytical computations for 𝑝 (𝜔 ) in the deadband. In particular, for 𝜔 ∈ Ω0, we can write 

𝑝 (𝜔 ) ∝ 𝑀 𝜑 

 2𝜔 𝜖 2



,22 where 𝑀 𝜑 is the moment-generating function 

𝑀 𝜑 (𝑠 ) := E[exp (𝑠𝑃 )] ∝ 

∫

exp (𝑠𝑃 )𝜑 (𝑃 ) d𝑃 . 

Expanding 𝑀 𝜑 in a Taylor series around 𝜔 = 0 gives 

𝑀 𝜑 

 2𝜔 𝜖 2



= 𝑀 𝜑 (0) + d𝑀 𝜑 

d𝜔 𝜔 =0

𝜔 + 12d2 𝑀 𝜑 

d𝜔 2 𝜔 =0

𝜔 2 + 𝑂 (𝜔 3)

= 1 + 2

𝜖 2 E[𝑃 ] 𝜔 + 2

𝜖 4 E[𝑃 2] 𝜔 2 + 𝑂 (𝜔 3) . (S38) Eq. (S38) shows that the first and second derivatives of 𝑝 (𝜔 ) at 𝜔 = 0 are 

d𝑝 

d𝜔 𝜔 =0

∝ E[𝑃 ]

d2 𝑝 

d𝜔 2 𝜔 =0

∝ E[𝑃 2] .

The first condition, E[𝑃 ] = 0, is expected to hold because of energy conservation imposed by Eq. 7 (main text) and assuming ergodicity. As a result, the first derivative of 𝑝 (𝜔 ) vanishes at 𝜔 = 0, and the second derivative is strictly positive for any non-degenerate distribution with E[𝑃 2] > 0. This establishes that 𝜔 = 0 is a local minimum of 𝑝 (𝜔 ) for arbitrarily small, but non-zero, values of 𝑃 .To better quantify the impact of the power-induced dip at 𝜔 = 0, we assume that for |𝑃 | ≤ 𝛿 /2

𝜑 (𝑃 ) = 𝑐 . 

Since we approximated the normalization 𝑍 with a constant, we can integrate Eq. 2 (main text) for 𝜔 ∈ Ω0. This yields 

𝑝 (𝜔 ) ∝ 

∫ 𝛿 /2 

> −𝛿 /2

𝑐 exp 

 2𝑃 𝜖 2 𝜔 



d𝑃 

= 𝑐𝜖 2

𝜔 sinh 

 𝛿𝜔 𝜖 2



. (S39) Eq. (S39) is the ansatz we fit with MLE on the data from the United Kingdom, as discussed in detail in Sec. S11.  

> B. Peaks at Control Boundaries

Since the frequency control changes its magnitude between Ω1 and Ω2, the frequency distributions in Figs. 2B, E (main text) have two peaks at ±𝜔 1. Large frequency fluctuations that populate the histograms around the peaks can happen when, in Eq. 2 (main text), the slow power is large enough to drift the system’s average beyond ±𝜔 1. Similarly to Eq. (S36), considering 𝑃 > 0, this happens if 

Λ1 (1, 𝑃 ) ≥ 𝜔 1 ,

which is to say 

𝑃 ≥ 𝑃 𝑐 := 𝛾 1 (𝜔 1 − 𝜔 0) ,

where we reused 𝑃 𝑐 for simplicity. Without a closed-form expression for 𝜑 (𝑃 ), we cannot directly fit the peaks at ±𝜔 1. Roughly speaking, these peaks are expected to appear when the marginalization in Eq. 2 (main text) receives a significant contribution from values of 𝑃 

near the boundaries ±𝑃 𝑐 . This requires that 𝜑 (𝑃 ) has sufficient probability mass in a neighborhood of ±𝑃 𝑐 of width 𝜎 2

and does not decay too rapidly in this region, so that the Gaussian contributions 𝑓 2 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) centered beyond ±𝜔 1 contribute visibly to 𝑝 (𝜔 ) after marginalization.  

> C. Heavy Tails

We observe that a 𝑞 -Gaussian fit fits the frequency tails more accurately than a Gaussian one. For details, see Sec. S11. In Fig. S9, we plot a quantile-quantile (Q-Q) plot, intended as a companion figure to Fig. 2G (main text). Examining the plot, we observe that the 𝑞 -Gaussian data points fall along the main diagonal, indicating that the 𝑞 -Gaussian distribution closely matches the empirical distribution across the entire range of quantiles. In contrast, the 23    

> FIG. S9. Q-Q plot for the frequency tails in the United Kingdom. The 𝑥 -axis shows the theoretical quantiles, calculated as the quantiles of the fitted distributions (a Gaussian and a 𝑞 -Gaussian). The 𝑦 -axis shows the empirical quantiles taken from the empirical data.

Gaussian fit deviates from the diagonal in the tails, around 𝜔 2, falling below the empirical quantiles. This indicates that the Gaussian fit underestimates the tails of the frequency distribution. Although recovering a closed-form expression for a 𝑞 -Gaussian distribution from our statistical model is difficult, we can carry forward an analytical argument for the tails. Heavy tails arise from integrating 𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) against a heavy-tailed distribution 𝜑 (𝑃 ). We demonstrate this by employing saddlepoint approximation [64]. The goal of this derivation is to demonstrate that heavy tails in 𝑝 (𝜔 ) are inherited from the market power distribution. To simplify calculations, we consider linear control across all frequencies with a single damping parameter 𝛾 . Such an assumption is sensible as we are only interested in the tail of 𝑝 (𝜔 ). Therefore, we can neglect boundary effects caused by the separation between the deadzone and the two control regions. For uniform control, our model becomes analytically integrable since the distribution 𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) reduces to the Gaussian 

𝑓 (𝜔 | 𝑃 ) ∝ exp 

"

− 𝛾 𝜖 2



𝜔 − 𝑃 𝛾 

2#

(S40) with a constant normalization factor. Consequently, 𝑝 (𝜔 ) in Eq. 2 (main text) can be written as a convolution between Eq. (S40) and 𝜓 (𝑦 ) := 𝛾 𝜑 (𝛾𝑦 ), which is a rescaling of 𝜑 (𝑃 ) obtained with the change of variable 𝑦 = 𝑃 /𝛾 . Formally, 

𝑝 (𝜔 ) ∝ 

∫

exp 



− 𝛾 𝜖 2 (𝜔 − 𝑦 )2

𝜓 (𝑦 ) d𝑦 . 

We assume a heavy-tailed ansatz of the form 𝜓 (𝑦 ) ∼ | 𝑦 |−𝛽 with 𝛽 > 0. This allows us to rewrite the convolution in as 

𝑝 (𝜔 ) ∝ 

∫

|𝑦 |−𝛽 exp 



− 𝜆 

2 Ψ(𝑦, 𝜔 )



d𝑦 (S41) 

Ψ(𝑦, 𝜔 ) := (𝜔 − 𝑦 )2 ,

where 𝜆 = 1/𝜎 2 = 2𝛾 /𝜖 2 denotes the precision of the Gaussian in the convolution. To apply saddlepoint approximation, we must first verify that Ψ(𝑦, 𝜔 ) is a convex function. This is straightforward: setting 𝑑 Ψ/𝑑𝑦 = 0 yields the minimizer 𝑦 min = 𝜔 , which is unique since 𝑑 2Ψ/𝑑𝑦 2 = 2 > 0. We also restrict the discussion to 𝜔 ≠ 0, which is not a limiting assumption when analyzing the tails of 𝑝 (𝜔 ). In practice, we focus on the regions where 

|𝜔 | > 𝜔 1.Then, we solve Eq. (S41) with the change of variable 𝑧 = √𝜆 (𝑦 − 𝜔 ). This yields 

𝑝 (𝜔 ) ∝ 

∫ 1

√𝜆 𝜔 + 𝑧 

√𝜆 

> −𝛽

exp 



− 𝑧 2

2



d𝑧 

= |𝜔 |−𝛽 

√𝜆 

∫

1 + 𝑧 

√𝜆𝜔 

> −𝛽

exp 



− 𝑧 2

2



d𝑧 . (S42) We can perform a Taylor expansion to the integrand in Eq. (S42) as long as 𝑟 (𝑧 ) := |𝑧 |/ √𝜆 |𝜔 | ≪ 1. Since the Gaussian factor localizes 𝑧 to values |𝑧 | = 𝑂 (1), we have 𝑟 (𝑧 ) ∼ 1/√𝜆 |𝜔 | ≪ 1. This condition is equivalent to 

𝜆 ≫ 1

|𝜔 |2 ⇐⇒ 𝜔 ≫ 𝜖 √︁ 

2𝛾 .24 Notice that as |𝜔 | increases, constraint on the shape of the Gaussian becomes less stringent in the tails: the Gaussian does not need to be as sharply peaked to keep the integral localized around 𝜔 . Performing a Taylor expansion, we get, up to the second order 

𝑝 (𝜔 ) ∝ |𝜔 |−𝛽 

√𝜆 

∫ 

1 − 𝛽𝑧 

√𝜆𝜔 + 𝛽 (𝛽 + 1)

2

𝑧 2

𝜆𝜔 2 + 𝑂 

 1

(√𝜆𝜔 )3

 

exp 



− 𝑧 2

2



d𝑧 . (S43) Odd terms in Eq. (S43) vanish when integrating and, finally, we obtain the approximation of Eq. 14 (main text). Our derivation is consistent with power-law tails of 𝑞 -Gaussian distributions discussed in the literature of superstatistics on power grids [12]. Matching parameters, typically a 𝑞 -Gaussian has power-law tails 𝑝 (𝜔 ) ∼ | 𝜔 |−2/( 𝑞 −1) [63]. The tail exponent 𝛽 of 𝜑 (𝑃 ) and the parameter 𝑞 are therefore related by 𝑞 = 1 + 2/𝛽 . The limit case of 𝑝 (𝜔 ) Gaussian is obtained as 𝑞 → 1, or equivalently, 𝛽 → +∞ . 

> S8. FREQUENCY AUTOCORRELATION

We initially derive a closed-form expression for the stationary frequency autocorrelation at short time lags. Specifically, we focus on Δ𝑡 ≤ 20 min of the stochastic frequency trajectory, where Δ𝑡 = 𝑡 − 𝑡 0 denotes the time lag from an initial time 𝑡 0 (conventionally 𝑡 0 = 0). In this regime, the superstatistical assumption treats 𝑃 (𝑡 ) as approximately constant, i.e., we might consider 𝑃 (𝑡 ) = 𝑃 over intervals during which the system relaxes. While 20 min is not substantially smaller than the characteristic timescale of power variations, e.g., market intervals of 30 min , the time range choice appears to be empirically justified: the autocorrelation exhibits a stationary exponential decay over this range. This observation might suggest that variations in 𝑃 (𝑡 ) can still be regarded as small over these time scales. Under this approximation, the evolution of 𝜔 (𝑡 ) is governed by effectively stationary coefficients, allowing a closed-form analytical expression for the autocorrelation to be derived. For longer lags Δ𝑡 , the stochastic frequency trajectories correlate with the slow power 𝑃 (𝑡 ), violating the assumption 

𝑃 (𝑡 ) = 𝑃 . Beyond this point, our derivation no longer applies. Here, the autocorrelation profile changes due to the influence of 𝑃 (𝑡 ) on 𝜔 (𝑡 ). We observe a power-law decay of the correlation at long lags and discuss its relation with fractional noise [68]. Empirically, to compute and plot the autocorrelation in Fig. 2H (main text), we aggregate frequency time series over 4-day batches and analyze data with lags Δ𝑡 up to 2 h (Δ𝑡 ≤ 20 min are short lags, and 20 min ≤ Δ𝑡 ≤ 2 h are long lags). This procedure prevents spurious finite-size effects and ensures the robustness of our analysis. We show the full autocorrelation profile in Fig. S10A.  

> A. Analytical Derivation of the Autocorrelation at Short Lags

First, we tackle the calculation of the conditional expectation 

𝑚 (Δ𝑡 | 𝜔 (0), 𝑃 ) := E [𝜔 (Δ𝑡 ) | 𝜔 (0), 𝑃 ] (S44) 

=

∫ +∞ −∞ 

𝜔 (Δ𝑡 ) 𝑝 (𝜔 (Δ𝑡 ) | 𝜔 (0), 𝑃 ) d𝜔 (Δ𝑡 ) ,

where 𝑝 (𝜔 (Δ𝑡 ) | 𝜔 (0), 𝑃 ) is the probability of observing 𝜔 (Δ𝑡 ) given the initial condition 𝜔 (0) and the slow power dispatch 𝑃 . We denote as 𝜔 (Δ𝑡 ) the dependence of the frequency on Δ𝑡 , although one should keep in mind that its trajectories are stochastic as per Eq. 1 (main text). Calculating Eq. (S44) has one main challenge. Boundary crossings between control regions may occur; for example, 𝜔 (0) might lie in Ω1 while 𝜔 (Δ𝑡 ) lies in Ω2. Therefore, one should take into account all initial conditions 𝜔 (0) giving rise to all potential crossings between control regions. To alleviate this burden, we approximate the conditional expectation as 

𝑚 (Δ𝑡 | 𝜔 (0), 𝑃 ) ≈ b𝑚 (Δ𝑡 | 𝜔 (0), 𝑃 ) , (S45) where b𝑚 (Δ𝑡 ; 𝜔 (0), 𝑃 ) is computed separately for Ω1 and Ω2 by neglecting boundary crossings. In principle, this approximation is expected to break down for short lags Δ𝑡 when the initial condition 𝜔 (0) lies close to the boundaries 

±𝜔 1. Still, we find that it works well in practice when fitting empirical data. Additionally, we neglect the deadband, since most of the recorded frequency data lie outside it. Formally, we consider the control function 𝐻 (𝜔 ) to be approximated by two affine functions in Ω1 and Ω2, and set 𝜔 0 = 0 in Eqs. (S8)-(S9). Second, using b𝑚 (Δ𝑡 ; 𝜔 (0), 𝑃 ), we approximate the second moment of 𝜔 (Δ𝑡 ) using the law of total expectation: 

E [𝜔 (0)𝜔 (Δ𝑡 ) | 𝑃 ] = E [E [𝜔 (0)𝜔 (Δ𝑡 ) | 𝜔 (0), 𝑃 ] | 𝑃 ] (S46) 

≈ E [𝜔 (0) b𝑚 (Δ𝑡 | 𝜔 (0), 𝑃 ) | 𝑃 ]

=

∫ +∞ −∞ 

𝜔 (0) b𝑚 (Δ𝑡 | 𝜔 (0), 𝑃 ) 𝑓 (𝜔 (0) | 𝑃 ) d𝜔 (0) . (S47) 25 In Eq. (S46), the inner expectation is taken with respect to the transition probability 𝑝 (𝜔 (Δ𝑡 ) | 𝜔 (0), 𝑃 ) while the outer one is with respect to 𝑓 (𝜔 (0) | 𝑃 ). Since b𝑚 (Δ𝑡 ; 𝜔 (0), 𝑃 ) has separate expressions for the control regimes, the integral in Eq. (S47) can be split into a sum over Ω1 and Ω2.We calculate b𝑚 (Δ𝑡 | 𝜔 (0), 𝑃 ). To simplify the notation, we introduce two indices: 𝑟 = 1, 2 to label the control regions, and 𝜎 = sgn (𝜔 (0)) to indicate the sign of 𝜔 (0) and, in turn, the branch (positive or negative) of Ω1 and Ω2. Using these indices, we define 

Ω𝑟 (𝜎 ) :=



Ω1 (1) 𝑟 = 1, 𝜎 = 1

Ω1 (− 1) 𝑟 = 1, 𝜎 = −1

Ω2 (1) 𝑟 = 2, 𝜎 = 1

Ω2 (− 1) 𝑟 = 2, 𝜎 = −1 .

(S48) With Eq. (S48), we introduce 

b𝑚 𝑟 𝜎 (Δ𝑡 | 𝜔 (0), 𝑃 ) := E [𝜔 (Δ𝑡 ) | 𝜔 (0), 𝑃, 𝜔 (𝑠 ) ∈ Ω𝑟 (𝜎 ) ∀ 𝑠 ∈ [ 0, Δ𝑡 ]] (S49) that separates b𝑚 (Δ𝑡 | 𝜔 (0), 𝑃 ) over the four signed control branches in Eq. (S48) by taking trajectories 𝜔 (𝑠 ) that for 

𝑠 ∈ [ 0, Δ𝑡 ] remain in the control branch where they are initially located. The rewriting in Eq. (S49) allows us to carry out calculations independently for each control branch as Eq. 2 (main text) reduces to an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process. The difference between Ω1 and Ω2 lies only in the damping coefficients 𝛾 1, 𝛾 2

and in the contribution of ±𝜔 0, ±𝜔 1. Conveniently, we rewrite Eq. 2 (main text) in its Itô differential form 

d𝜔 (𝑠 ) = −𝛾 𝑟 (𝜔 (𝑠 ) − Λ𝑟 (𝜎, 𝑃 )) d𝑠 + 𝜖 d𝑊 (𝑠 ) , (S50) where 𝑠 ∈ [ 0, Δ𝑡 ], 𝑊 (𝑠 ) is a Wiener process whose distributional derivative corresponds to the Gaussian white noise 𝜉 ,and 𝛾 𝑟 and Λ𝑟 denote either 𝛾 1, Λ1 or 𝛾 2, Λ2, depending on the control region. Λ1 and Λ2 are defined in Eq. 11-12 (main text). Integrating Eq. (S50) between 0 and Δ𝑡 , and 𝜔 (0) and 𝜔 (Δ𝑡 ), yields 

𝜔 (Δ𝑡 ) = exp (− 𝛾 𝑟 Δ𝑡 ) 𝜔 (0) + 𝛾 𝑟 Λ𝑟 (𝜎, 𝑃 )

∫ Δ𝑡 

> 0

exp (− 𝛾 𝑟 (Δ𝑡 − 𝑠 )) d𝑠 + 𝜖 

∫ Δ𝑡 

> 0

exp (− 𝛾 𝑟 (Δ𝑡 − 𝑠 )) d𝑊 (𝑠 )

from which the approximation of the conditional expectation follows: 

b𝑚 𝑟 𝜎 (Δ𝑡 | 𝜔 (0), 𝑃 ) = exp (− 𝛾 𝑟 Δ𝑡 ) 𝜔 (0) + 𝛾 𝑟 Λ𝑟 (𝜎, 𝑃 )

∫ Δ𝑡 

> 0

exp (− 𝛾 𝑟 (Δ𝑡 − 𝑠 )) d𝑠 (S51) 

= Λ 𝑟 (𝜎, 𝑃 ) + ( 𝜔 (0) − Λ𝑟 (𝜎, 𝑃 )) exp (− 𝛾 𝑟 Δ𝑡 ) . (S52) In Eq. (S51), the Itô integral of the noise vanishes because the Wiener process has a zero conditional mean. Eq. (S52) is a standard result for an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process where the conditional mean relaxes exponentially towards its mean Λ𝑟 

with characteristic decay rate 𝛾 𝑟 .We calculate the second moment. This amounts to evaluating the integral in Eq. (S47) separately for 𝜎 = ±1, 𝑟 = 1, 2.We substitute Eq. (S52) into Eq. (S47), and using the quasi-static distribution in Eq. 10 (main text), we get 

E [𝜔 (0)𝜔 (Δ𝑡 ) | 𝑃 ] ≈ 1

𝑍 ∑︁ 𝜎 =±1

∫  

> Ω𝑟 (𝜎 )

𝐶 𝑟 𝜔 (0) [ Λ𝑟 + ( 𝜔 (0) − Λ𝑟 (𝜎, 𝑃 )) exp (− 𝛾 𝑟 Δ𝑡 )] exp 



− 𝜆 𝑟 

2 (𝜔 (0) − Λ𝑟 (𝜎, 𝑃 )) 2



d𝜔 (0) .

(S53) Here, we unclutter notation with the precision 𝜆 𝑟 := 2𝛾 𝑟 /𝜖 2. Also, recall that 𝑍 = 𝑍 (𝑃 ), 𝐶 𝑟 = 𝐶 𝑟 (𝜎, 𝑃 ), with 𝑟 = 1, 2.The sum over 𝜎 = ±1 merges contributions coming from the two signed branches of Ω1 and Ω2 to get only a dependence on 𝑟 on the left-hand side of the equation. Once again, the approximation arises from using b𝑚 (Δ𝑡 | 𝜔 (0), 𝑃 ) instead of 

𝑚 (Δ𝑡 | 𝜔 (0), 𝑃 ).Note that the dependence on Δ𝑡 in Eq. (S53) comes only from specific terms of the integrand. All other terms yield constants that are subsequently normalized in the autocorrelation. Therefore, we simplify Eq. (S53) as 

E [𝜔 (0)𝜔 (Δ𝑡 ) | 𝑃 ] ≈ 1

𝑍 exp (− 𝛾 𝑟 Δ𝑡 )∑︁ 

> 𝜎 =±1

∫  

> Ω𝑟 (𝜎 )

𝐶 𝑟 𝜔 (0)( 𝜔 (0) − Λ𝑟 (𝜎, 𝑃 )) exp 



− 𝜆 𝑟 

2 (𝜔 (0) − Λ𝑟 (𝜎, 𝑃 )) 2



d𝜔 (0) + const. (S54) The integral in Eq. (S54) involves calculating the moments of a truncated Gaussian distribution which could, in principle, be expressed exactly. Performing these computations is not strictly necessary, as the profile of the autocorrelation can still be found while keeping the integrals unsolved. Although a closed-form expression for 𝜑 (𝑃 ) is not available, since we have neglected boundary crossings, the terms over Ω1 and Ω2 can be integrated separately. This gives rise to two distinct exponentially decaying contributions. In 26 particular, we observe that Eq. (S54) can be conveniently rewritten by multiplying and dividing it by the region-specific normalizations 𝑍 𝑟 (𝑃 ) of Eqs. (S34)-(S35). This gives 

E [𝜔 (0)𝜔 (Δ𝑡 ) | 𝑃 ] ≈ 1

𝑍 exp (− 𝛾 𝑟 Δ𝑡 )

∫

> Ω𝑟

𝜔 (0) [ 𝜔 (0) − Λ𝑟 (sgn (𝜔 (0)) , 𝑃 )] 𝑓 𝑟 (𝜔 (0) | 𝑃 ) d𝜔 (0) + const. 

= exp (− 𝛾 𝑟 Δ𝑡 ) 𝑤 𝑟 (𝑃 ) E𝜔 (0) [ 𝜔 (0) − Λ𝑟 (sgn (𝜔 (0)) , 𝑃 )] | 𝑃  + const. (S55) Here, 𝑤 𝑟 (𝑃 ) := 𝑍 𝑟 (𝑃 )/ 𝑍 (𝑃 ), and the conditional expectations are computed with respect to the truncated Gaussian distributions in Eq. 10 (main text). These distributions are defined over both signed branches of Ω1 and Ω2, and therefore marginalize 𝜎 = ±1. The factor 𝑤 𝑟 (𝑃 ) represents the probability that the power grid resides in the Ω1 or Ω2 region for a given 𝑃 .Integrating Eq. (S55) against 𝜑 (𝑃 ) gives 

E[𝜔 (0)𝜔 (Δ𝑡 )] ≈ ∑︁ 

> 𝑟 =1,2

𝐼 𝑟 exp (− 𝛾 𝑟 Δ𝑡 ) + const. (S56) 

𝐼 𝑟 := 1

𝑍 𝜑 

∫

𝑤 𝑟 (𝑃 ) E𝜔 (0) [ 𝜔 (0) − Λ𝑟 (sgn (𝜔 (0)) , 𝑃 )] | 𝑃  𝜑 (𝑃 ) d𝑃 , 

where 𝑍 𝜑 is the normalization constant of 𝜑 (𝑃 ). Eq. (S56) shows that the autocorrelation is well described by the weighted sum of two exponentials at short lags. Indeed, 

𝐶 (Δ𝑡 ) := Cov [𝜔 (0), 𝜔 (Δ𝑡 )] 

Var [𝜔 (0)] 

which, using Eq. (S56), can be fitted by 

𝐶 (Δ𝑡 ) = 𝐴 1 exp (− 𝛾 1Δ𝑡 ) + 𝐴 2 exp (− 𝛾 2Δ𝑡 ) (S57) with the normalization condition 𝐶 (0) = 1 requiring 𝐴 1 + 𝐴 2 = 1, i.e., 𝐴 1 = 𝐴 and 𝐴 2 = 1 − 𝐴 . 

> B. Empirical Fit

We fit Eq. (S57) with curve_fit() from SciPy. For comparison, we also fit our data with a single-exponential decay 

𝐶 (Δ𝑡 ) = exp (− 𝛾 Δ𝑡 ), which one obtains by assuming linear control with a single damping coefficient 𝛾 .Results for the double-exponential decay fit are as follows: United Kingdom: 𝛾 1 = . . . 𝛾 2 = (1.45 ± 0.06 ) · 10 −4 rad /s2

𝐴 1 = 2 · 10 −16 ≈ 0 𝐴 2 ≈ 1

SSR = 0.079 081 4 

South Africa: 𝛾 1 = (8.6 ± 0.2) · 10 −4 rad /s2 𝛾 2 = (1.15 ± 0.02 ) · 10 −4rad /s2 (S58) 

𝐴 1 = 0.446 ± 0.007 𝐴 2 = 0.554 ± 0.007 

SSR = 0.022 734 2 .

Results for the single-exponential decay fit are as follows: United Kingdom: 𝛾 = (1.452 ± 0.005 ) · 10 −4 rad /s2 SSR = 0.079 081 5 (S59) South Africa: 𝛾 = (2.28 ± 0.04 ) · 10 −4 rad /s2 SSR = 1.189 210 2 .

We find that a single-exponential decay accurately fits the frequency autocorrelation in the United Kingdom. In fact, the single coefficient 𝛾 in Eq. (S59) is effectively identical to 𝛾 2 found by fitting the double-decay ansatz. Numerically, in the double-decay fit, all of the weight is given to one parameter, 𝛾 2, rendering 𝛾 1 idle. The Sum of Squared Residuals (SSR) of the two fits is also identical. In South Africa, the double-decay ansatz fits the empirical autocorrelation much better than the single-decay ansatz.  

> C. Autocorrelation at Long Lags

For long lags Δ𝑡 ≥ 20 min , the autocorrelation exhibits a profile that deviates from the exponential behavior described above. We show its profile in Fig. S10B. First, we observe recurrent deviations arising from market transactions. Second, we observe a slow power-law decay. This finding aligns with previous observations [25], where the power-law decay is explained through fractional noise [68]. This type of noise causes the correlation to decay slowly with a power-law dependence on the Hurst exponent H : for a standard Wiener process, H = 1/2; if H > 1/2, the increments are positively 27 correlated; and if H < 1/2, the increments are negatively correlated. In particular, with fractional noise, the correlation scales as 𝐶 (Δ𝑡 ) ∼ Δ𝑡 2H− 2 [25]. Fitting the data in a log-log plot, we obtain United Kingdom: H = 0.6975 ± 0.0007 

South Africa: H = 0.6243 ± 0.0005 

which agree well with previous observations [25]. min                      

> FIG. S10. Autocorrelation. (A) Autocorrelation at all time lags 0 h ≤Δ𝑡 ≤2 h . Lighter areas are standard deviations computed over the 4-day batches used to calculate the autocorrelation. (B) Log-log plot of the autocorrelation at long lags, i.e., 20 min ≤Δ𝑡 ≤2 h . We fit the log-log plot with a power-law ansatz ∼Δ𝑡 𝑎 , we use 𝑎 to compute the Hurst exponents as H=(𝑎 +2)/ 2.
> S9. SUPERSTATICS VALIDATION A. Deadband Escape Time

Since there is no damping in the deadband, at a finer scale, the relaxation time formula Δ𝑡 = 1/𝛾 breaks down. We obtain a finer estimate of the characteristic time spent by 𝜔 (𝑡 ) in the deadband to validate superstatistics. To do so, we employ mean first-passage time theory [67]. Our goal is to calculate the mean first-passage exit time 𝜏 exit , which is the average time taken by a stochastic trajectory starting at 𝜔 (0) in the deadband, i.e., 𝜔 (0) ∈ Ω0, to cross either ±𝜔 0.The deadband is not damped, hence 𝐻 (𝜔 ) = 0 for 𝜔 ∈ Ω0. Additionally, for short time scales, the slow power 𝑃 (𝑡 ) can be kept constant. The Langevin equation in Eq. 1 (main text) then becomes, for 𝜔 ∈ Ω0,

d𝜔 

d𝑡 = 𝑃 + 𝜖𝜉 . (S60) In particular, we can take 𝑃 = 0 as this yields pure Brownian motion in Eq. (S60), where there is no drift and the mean first-passage exit time is maximized. Using the backward Kolmogorov approach [67] on Eq. (S60), we can write an ordinary differential equation for the mean first-passage time 𝜏 exit (𝜔 (0)) :

𝜖 2

2d2𝜏 exit 

d𝜔 (0)2 = −1 , (S61) with boundary conditions being 𝜏 exit (± 𝜔 0) = 0. Integrating Eq. (S61) twice gives 

𝜏 exit (𝜔 (0)) = 𝜔 20 − 𝜔 (0)2

𝜖 2 .

We evaluate it at 𝜔 (0) = 0, where it is maximized, as doing so gives us a worst-case estimate to validated superstatistics. In particular, we get 

𝜏 exit = 𝜔 20

𝜖 2 . (S62) Setting 𝜔 0 = 2𝜋 · 0.015 rad /s as per Eqs. (S1)-(S2) and using the values of 𝜖 extracted via KR in Eqs. (S72)-(S73), we obtain (rounding at the first decimal) United Kingdom: 𝜏 exit = 2.3 min (S63) South Africa: 𝜏 exit = 1.3 min . (S64) These values are compatible with the control relaxation times 𝜏 reported in the main text. 28  

> B. Kernel Regression for Grid Parameters

To calculate the control relaxation rates, we estimate the parameters governing the frequency dynamics, 𝛾 and 𝜖 . As discussed in the main text, obtaining reliable estimates of these parameters with KR requires using continuous trajectories 

𝜔 (𝑡 ). This constraint makes it difficult to extract region-specific damping coefficients 𝛾 1 and 𝛾 2, since doing so would require selecting trajectories that do not cross control boundaries. Such trajectories do not contain sufficient data to estimate the damping coefficients robustly. Consequently, for validation purposes only, we simplify 𝐻 (𝜔 ) by assuming linear damping with a single parameter, 𝛾 .First, we detrend the frequency measurements using a Gaussian kernel with standard deviation 𝜎 = 60 s [18, 29], yielding 𝜔 det (𝑡 ) = 𝜔 (𝑡 ) − 𝜔 filter (𝑡 ). We show a snapshot of the filtering process in Fig. S11A covering 15 min of data. For the filtered signal, the slow power drift can be neglected, and the dynamics is well described by 

d𝜔 det 

d𝑡 = 𝛾𝜔 det + 𝜖𝜉 . (S65) Eq. (S65) yields the Fokker–Planck equation 

𝜕 𝑝 𝜕𝑡 = −𝛾 𝜕 𝜕𝜔 det 

(𝜔 det 𝑝 ) + 𝜖 2

2

𝜕 2 𝑝 𝜕𝜔 2

> det

,

which can be written equivalently by making explicit its first two Kramers–Moyal coefficients [57], D1 (𝜔 det ) and D2 (𝜔 det ),as 

𝜕 𝑝 𝜕𝑡 = − 𝜕 𝜕𝜔 det 

(D 1 (𝜔 det ) 𝑝 ) + 𝜕 2

𝜕𝜔 2

> det

(𝐷 2 (𝜔 det ) 𝑝 ) . (S66) In Eq. (S66), D1 (𝜔 det ) = −𝛾𝜔 det is the drift coefficient, while D2 (𝜔 det ) = 𝜖 2/2 is the diffusion coefficient. We estimate the Kramers–Moyal coefficients using the kramersmoyal software package [62], which allows us to efficiently compute the estimators [61] 

𝐷 1 (𝜔 ) = 1

Δ𝑡 PMU 

⟨𝜔 det (𝑡 + Δ𝑡 PMU ) − 𝜔 det (𝑡 ) | 𝜔 det (𝑡 ) = 𝜔 ⟩ (S67) 

𝐷 2 (𝜔 ) = 12Δ𝑡 PMU 

(𝜔 det (𝑡 + Δ𝑡 PMU ) − 𝜔 det (𝑡 )) 2 | 𝜔 det (𝑡 ) = 𝜔 (S68) for D1 (𝜔 ) and D2 (𝜔 ), respectively. Here, ⟨· | 𝜔 det (𝑡 ) = 𝜔 ⟩ denotes a kernel-weighted conditional average at 𝜔 det (𝑡 ) = 𝜔 .Following the literature [18], we choose a scaled Epanechnikov kernel 𝐾 ℎ (𝑥 ) = 3[1 − ( 𝑥 /ℎ)2]/ 4ℎ, |𝑥 | < ℎ [52] with 

ℎ = 0.1 rad /s.As shown in Fig. S11C, the drift estimator 𝐷 1 (𝜔 ) exhibits a negative slope in both South Africa and the United Kingdom. In the United Kingdom, the slope is larger, reflecting tighter grid control. To obtain reliable estimates of 𝛾 , we fit the data 

𝜔 det populating the central portion of the distribution 𝑝 (𝜔 det ), where KR is stable. More specifically, we use linear least squares on those values of 𝐷 1 (𝜔 ) populated by at 50 thousand data points in the conditional averages of Eqs. (S67)-(S68). These vales lie in the central darker region of the histogram in Fig. S11B. This procedure returns United Kingdom: 𝛾 = (4.10 ± 0.03 ) · 10 −3 rad /s (S69) South Africa: 𝛾 = (1.838 ± 0.009 ) · 10 −3rad /s , (S70) which we use to calculate the values of 𝜏 = 1/𝛾 reported in the manuscript. We show the estimated 𝐷 2 (𝜔 ) in Fig. S11D. Its value shows a slight inflection as 𝜔 det departs from zero. Similar to previous findings [18, 29], we take 𝜖 extracted to be 

𝜖 =√︁ 2𝐷 2 (𝜔 det = 0) . (S71) This is close to the minimum of 𝐷 2 (𝜔 ) and, consequently, it yields a good worst-case estimate of the escape time 𝜏 exit in Eq. (S62). Empirically, we obtain (rounding at the first significant decimal) United Kingdom: 𝜖 = 0.008 rad /s 3/2 (S72) South Africa: 𝜖 = 0.01 rad /s 3/2 . (S73) All our estimates are consistent with those found for several grids worldwide [12, 18, 26, 27, 29]. Additionally, Eqs. (S69)-(S70) are compatible with the damping coefficient found by fitting the frequencies autocorrelation in Sec. S8. 29 min 

FIG. S11. KR to estimate control coefficients and noise amplitude. (A) Gaussian filtering of the frequency time series. The thicker and smoother line is 𝜔 filter (𝑡 ) obtained by applying a Gaussian smoothing on 𝜔 (𝑡 ), which is drawn with a lighter and thinner line. (B) PDF of 𝜔 det (𝑡 ). The central regions, denoted by a thicker line, are where the histogram bins are populated by more than 50k data points. We fit the drift in panel C over such data. (C) Drift coefficient of Eq. (S67) against 𝜔 det . (D) Diffusion coefficient of Eq. (S68) against 𝜔 det .The value of 𝐷 2 at 𝜔 det = 0 is used to calculate 𝜖 as per Eq. (S71). 

S10. ANALYTICAL DERIVATIONS OF PHASE ANGLE DIFFERENCE DISTRIBUTION A. Stochastic Damped-Driven Harmonic Oscillator 

We derive Eq. 3-4 (main text) from the swing equations in Eqs. (S5)-(S6). We assume a reduced grid with 𝑁 = 2 nodes and consider the power outputs 𝑃 1 and 𝑃 2 to be constant in time. Additionally, we make two constructive assumptions: 

𝛾 = 𝐷 1/𝑀 1 = 𝐷 2/𝑀 2 and 𝜅 = 𝐾 12 /𝑀 1 = 𝐾 21 /𝑀 2 [7, 37]. This allows us to rewrite the swing equations as second-order stochastic differential equations: 

d2𝜃 1

d𝑡 2 = −𝛾 d𝜃 1

𝑑𝑡 + 𝑃 1

𝑀 1

+ 𝜅 sin (𝜃 2 − 𝜃 1) + 𝜖 1

𝑀 1

𝜉 1 (S74) 

d2𝜃 2

d𝑡 2 = −𝛾 d𝜃 2

d𝑡 + 𝑃 2

𝑀 2

+ 𝜅 sin (𝜃 1 − 𝜃 2) + 𝜖 2

𝑀 2

𝜉 2 . (S75) Denoting the difference of the two phase angles as 𝑥 := 𝜃 1 − 𝜃 2 ∈ (− 2𝜋, 2𝜋 ), we subtract Eq. (S74) from Eq. (S75) and readily obtain Eqs. 3-4 (main text). We are only left with characterizing the noise. If 𝜉 1 and 𝜉 2 are i.i.d. Gaussian random variables with amplitudes 𝜖 1 and 

𝜖 2, then 𝜉 in Eq. 3 (main text) is also Gaussian with amplitude 

𝜖 =√︄ 𝜖 21

𝑀 1

+ 𝜖 22

𝑀 2

Eqs. 3-4 (main text) describes the motion of a stochastic damped-driven harmonic oscillator in a tilted washboard potential and serves as the pivotal equation of our reduced model for phase-angle differences. The tilted washboard potential 

𝑉 (𝑥 ) := −𝛿𝑥 − 2𝜅 cos 𝑥 

governs the system’s stability, with the stationary states of the phase angle difference 𝑥 distributed around its minima. We illustrate 𝑉 (𝑥 ) for different parameter choices in Fig. S12A. The potential’s tilt depends on the mechanical power difference 𝛿 between the two generators. Because of energy conservation, 𝑃 1 + 𝑃 2 = 0 holds. Hence, 𝛿 = 0 if and only if 𝑃 1 = 𝑃 2 = 0. Any other value of 𝑃 1, 𝑃 2 produces a tilt in the potential. 30 We also note that 𝑉 (𝑥 + 2𝜋 ) = 𝑉 (𝑥 ) − 2𝜋𝛿 . In other words, the potential is periodic in 2𝜋 , up to a constant shift set by the linear tilt 𝛿 . Consequently, configurations of 𝑥 (𝑡 ) that differ by integer multiples of 2𝜋 are equivalent, since their evolution is governed by 𝑑𝑉 /𝑑𝑥 . Physically, only phase differences enter the exchanged-power (sine) terms of Eqs. (S74)-(S75), and therefore 2𝜋 translations in 𝑥 (𝑡 ) do not affect the power exchange. From a practical standpoint, we can restrict our analysis to 𝑥 ∈ [ 0, 2𝜋 ). 

> B. Equilibria

We characterize the stationary points of 𝑉 (𝑥 ) focusing on Eq. 3 (main text) as a dynamical system [7], i.e., setting the noise to zero. For convenience, we define the relative power difference 

𝜌 := 𝛿 /2𝜅 . 

Using 𝜌 , we classify equilibria as follows. 1. If 𝜌 > 0 and |𝜌 | < 1, there is a positive power difference between generator 1 and 2. The power grid admits stable working points that are the minima of 𝑉 (𝑥 ):

𝑥 min ,1 = arcsin 𝜌 𝑥 min ,2 = 𝑥 min ,1 − 2𝜋 𝑥 max ,1 = −𝑥 min ,1 + 𝜋 𝑥 max ,2 = −𝑥 min ,1 − 𝜋 . 

2. If 𝜌 < 0 and |𝜌 | < 1, the setup is analogous to (1), but with a negative power difference: 

𝑥 min ,1 = arcsin 𝜌 𝑥 min ,2 = 𝑥 min ,1 + 2𝜋 𝑥 max ,1 = −𝑥 min ,1 − 𝜋 𝑥 max ,2 = −𝑥 min ,1 + 𝜋 . 

3. If 𝜌 = 0, then 𝛿 = 0. Physically, this means that both generators balance their own power demand. If this happens, the transmission line between 1 and 2 becomes idle. In fact, the stable points of the grid are 

𝑥 min ,1 = 𝑥 min ,2 = 0, 2𝜋 𝑥 max ,1 = 𝑥 max ,2 = ±𝜋 , 

which make the sine term in Eq. 3 (main text) vanish. 4. If 𝜌 = ±1, the power exchanged between 1 and 2 is the maximum allowed by the transmission line. Maxima and minima collapse into the saddle points: 

𝑥 saddle ,1 = ± 𝜋 

2

𝑥 saddle ,2 = ∓ 3𝜋 

2 .

5. |𝜌 | > 1 would imply a power exchange larger than what is physically allowed by the transmission line. In this case, there is no stable fixed point for the grid to operate, but only runaway solutions. We show all stability regions where the equilibria in (1)-(5) lie in Fig. S12B. We restrict our discussion to case (1), which is valid during regular operations and physically equivalent to (2).  

> C. Solving the Smoluchowski Equation

We derive the closed-form equilibrium distribution 𝑝 (𝑥 ) fitted in the main text. To do so, we assume that the grid operates in the overdamped limit where 

𝛾 ≫ d2𝑉 

d𝑥 2 𝑥 =𝑥 min 

= 2𝜅 √︁ 1 − 𝜌 2 . (S76) In words, the damping coefficient 𝛾 is large compared to the characteristic frequency of the undamped system. Physically, this implies that after a perturbation, phase differences readjust slowly and monotonically, without oscillating. In the stable operating regime where |𝜌 | < 1, Eq. (S76) shows that if |𝜌 | → 1, the transmission line is almost at capacity and cannot change power flow much in response to phase deviations. As a consequence, a smaller damping is sufficient to control phase deviations. Conversely, when |𝜌 | is small, the transmission line is underloaded and reacts strongly to deviations. To suppress perturbations in this case, 𝛾 must be larger. 31 Phase angle difference x     

> −2π−π 0π2π−15
> −10
> −50510
> Tilted washboard potential V(x)
> Equilibria

# A           

> δ=−2
> δ=−1
> δ= 0
> δ= 1
> δ= 2
> −2π−π 0π2π
> Stable eq.  δ = 0 Saddle Unstable  region Stable  region

# B

FIG. S12. Tilted washboard potential. The 𝑦 -axis is arbitrarily scaled, and we conventionally set 𝜅 = 1. (A) We display 𝑉 (𝑥 ) for different values of 𝛿 . The circles represent the equilibria of 𝑉 (𝑥 ). Notice how, for 𝛿 ≠ 0, two equilibria arise, one being the translation by 

2𝜋 of the other. (B) We plot the stability regions of 𝑉 (𝑥 ). Unstable equilibria lie in the purple stable region {| 𝑥 | ≤ 𝜋 /2} ∪ {| 𝑥 | ≥ 3𝜋 /2}.Conversely, in the unstable yellow region, 𝑉 (𝑥 ) admits only runaway solutions and no equilibria. Saddles between the two regions are denoted by gray dashed lines. When 𝛿 = 0, the potential is symmetric, and the only equilibrium within (− 2𝜋, 2𝜋 ) is indicated by the black line at 𝑥 = 0.

In the high-damping limit, we can neglect the second derivative in Eq. 3 (main text) [57, Chapter 11.2] and write 

𝑣 = d𝑥 

d𝑡 (S77) 

𝛾 d𝑥 

d𝑡 = − d𝑉 

d𝑥 + 𝜖𝜉 . (S78) The system in Eqs. (S77)-(S78) includes the tilt 𝛿 . Therefore, the system generally settles into a steady state with a non-zero probability current. In formula, let 𝑊 (𝑥, 𝑣, 𝑡 ) be the probability density of the phase space described by 𝑥 and 𝑣 .We can define the marginal probability distribution and the probability current 

𝑝 (𝑥, 𝑡 ) :=

∫

𝑊 (𝑥, 𝑣, 𝑡 ) d𝑣 𝐽 (𝑥, 𝑡 ) :=

∫

𝑣 𝑊 (𝑥, 𝑣, 𝑡 ) d𝑣 . 

These two variables satisfy the continuity equation 

𝜕 𝑝 𝜕𝑡 + 𝜕𝐽 𝜕𝑥 = 0 , (S79) which we couple with the Smoluchowski equation given by Eq. (S78): [57] 

𝜕 𝑝 𝜕𝑡 = 1

𝛾 𝜕 𝜕𝑥 

 d𝑉 

d𝑥 + 2

𝜆 𝜕 𝑝 𝜕𝑥 



, (S80) where 𝜆 := 2𝛾 /𝜖 2.A general solution of Eqs. (S79)-(S80) is found by imposing the stationarity condition 𝜕 𝑝 /𝜕𝑡 = 0 in Eq. (S79) to get 

𝐽 (𝑥 ) ≡ 𝐽 eq . By combining this condition with Eq. (S80), we get 

𝛾𝐽 eq = d𝑉 

d𝑥 𝑝 − 2

𝜆 𝜕 𝑝 𝜕𝑥 .

Integrating in 𝑥 , we get the general stationary probability 𝑝 (𝑥 ) for a non-zero probability current 

𝑝 (𝑥 ) = exp 



− 𝜆 

2𝑉 (𝑥 )

  

𝑍 − 𝜆𝛾 

2 𝐽 eq 

∫ 𝑥 

> 0

exp 

 𝜆 

2𝑉 (𝑥 ′)



d𝑥 ′



. (S81) It is sufficient to require that 𝑝 (𝑥 ) is bounded to ensure that it is 2𝜋 -periodic [57]. Using periodicity, one can determine the normalization constant 𝑍 by imposing normalization, namely, 

∫ 2 𝜋 

> 0

𝑝 (𝑥 ) d𝑥 = 1 ,32 which gives 

𝑍 =

1 + 𝜆𝛾 

2 𝐽 eq 

∫ 2 𝜋 

> 0

exp 



− 𝜆 

2𝑉 (𝑥 )

 ∫ 𝑥 

> 0

exp 

 𝜆 

2𝑉 (𝑥 ′)



d𝑥 ′



d𝑥 

∫ 2 𝜋 

> 0

exp 



− 𝜆 

2𝑉 (𝑥 )



d𝑥 .

These equations are hard to fit numerically. However, experimental data in SA reveal that phase differences 𝑥 are tightly localized near a potential minimum well described by 𝐽 (𝑥 ) ≡ 0. This allows us to set the probability current to zero and fit our data with a simpler distribution. If there is no probability current, the stationary distribution of Eq. (S81) reduces to 

𝑝 (𝑥 ) = 1

𝑍 exp 



− 𝜆 

2𝑉 (𝑥 )



, (S82) where 𝑍 is the normalization constant 

𝑍 =

∫ 2 𝜋 

> 0

exp 



− 𝜆 

2𝑉 (𝑥 )



d𝑥 . 

This simplification greatly reduces the computational burden of running MLE to fit the data.  

> S11. MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATION

We use MLE to fit the deadband and the tails of the frequency distribution in the United Kingdom, as well as the phase-difference distribution in South Africa. That is, we optimize the fit parameters, subject to constraints specific to the variable under study, by minimizing the negative log-likelihood of the measured data. The deadband is fitted with Eq. (S39) using a single parameter 𝑎 = 𝜖 2/𝛿 , which is bounded loosely as 𝑎 ∈ [ 10 −8, 10 4]

to ensure positivity. After fitting, the distribution is normalized numerically in Ω0.The tails are fitted with a Gaussian and a 𝑞 -Gaussian ansatz. Specifically, for the Gaussian, we take a distribution centered at 𝜇 = 𝜔 1 and fit the aggregated tails beyond 𝜔 1 with 

𝑝 (𝜔 ) = 2 ×



0 𝜔 < 𝜔 1

1

√2𝜋𝜎 2 exp 



− 12

 𝜔 − 𝜔 1

𝜎 

2

𝜔 ≥ 𝜔 1 .

We optimize 𝜎 that is loosely bounded as 𝜎 ∈ [ 10 −6, 10 4]. For the 𝑞 -Gaussian, we take a distribution centered at 𝜇 = 𝜔 1

and fit the aggregated tails beyond 𝜔 1 with 

𝑝 (𝜔 ) = 2 ×



0 𝜔 < 𝜔 1

√𝛽 𝐶 𝑞 

1 + ( 1 − 𝑞 ) 𝛽 (𝜔 − 𝜔 1)21/( 1−𝑞 )+ 𝜔 ≥ 𝜔 1 ,

where, [·] + is the positive part function, 𝑞 is the 𝑞 -Gaussian nonextensivity parameter, 𝛽 is its inverse temperature, and 

𝐶 𝑞 its normalization constant. We optimize 𝑞 and 𝛽 that are loosely bounded as 𝑞 ∈ [ 10 −6, 2.9999 ] and 𝛽 ∈ [ 10 −6, 10 2].The tilted washboard distribution is fitted with two parameters, 𝑎 = 𝛿𝛾 /𝜖 2 and 𝑏 = 2𝜅𝛾 /𝜖 2, which are again loosely bounded as 𝑎 ∈ [ 10 −6, 10 4] and 𝑏 ∈ [ 10 −6, 10 4] to ensure their positivity. MLE over 1 million data points for each ansatz gives the parameters Deadband: 𝑎 = 0.0518 ± 0.0007 

Tails Gaussian: 𝜎 = 0.1671 ± 0.0001 neg-log-lik = −1 061 318 .989 721 4 

Tails 𝑞 -Gaussian: 𝑞 = 1.261 ± 0.002 𝛽 = 29 .10 ± 0.09 neg-log-lik = −1 080 778 .634 702 3 

Phase difference: 𝑎 = 420 .8 ± 0.6

𝑏 = 435 .1 ± 0.6 .

We obtain parameters’ standard deviations by inverting the Hessian of the log-likelihood evaluated at the optimum. We add iterative Tikhonov regularization when the Hessian is ill-conditioned. That is, we invert 𝐻 reg = 𝐻 + 𝜆 I where 𝐻 is the log-likelihood Hessian, I the identity matrix, and 𝜆 a regularization parameter that gets increased iteratively. To ensure convergence to the global minimum, we repeat each optimization with 50 random parameter initializations and select the fit with the lowest negative log-likelihood. We also accept only fits whose parameter variances remain below a threshold, ensuring that the regularization has not overly smoothed the log-likelihood. In practice, such precautions are not needed for the fits above, but make the routine more stable for potential future utilizations. For the tails fit, we also report the negative log-likelihood values (truncated to arbitrary precision). Note how the negative log-likelihood is lower for the 𝑞 -Gaussian fit, confirming its higher accuracy in modeling heavy tails, as also corroborated by the Q-Q plot of Fig. S9.