Title: 2603.28440v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.28440v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 02:07:35 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
1

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

# A System -View Op timal Additional Active Power 

# Control of Wind Turbine s for Grid Frequency Support 

Yubo Zhang, Student Member, IEEE , Zhiguo Hao, and Songhao Yang, Member, IEEE , Baohui Zhang, Fellow, IEEE 

Abstract ŌĆöAdditional active power control (AAPC) of wind 

turbines (WTs ) is essential to improve the transient frequency 

stability of low -inertia power systems. Most of the existing 

research has focused on imitating the frequency response of the 

synchronous generator (SG), known as virtual inertia control 

(VIC) , but are such control law s optimal for the power system s?

Inspired by this question, this paper proposes an optimal AAPC of 

WTs to maximiz e the frequency nadir post a major power deficit. 

By decoupling the WT response and the frequency dynamics, the 

optimal frequency trajectory is solved based on the trajectory 

model , and its universality is strictly prove n. Then the optimal 

AAPC of WTs is constructed reversely based on the average 

system frequency (ASF) model with the optimal frequency 

trajectory as the desired control results. The proposed method can 

significantly improve the system frequency nadir. Meanwhile, the 

event insensitivity makes it can be deployed based on the on -line 

rolling update under a hypothetic disturbance, avoiding the heavy 

post -event computational burden. Finally , s imulation results in a

two -machine power system and the IEEE 39 bus power system 

verify the effectiveness of the optimal AAPC of WTs .

Index Terms ŌĆöFrequency support, frequency nadir, wind turbine 

(WT ), additional active power control (AAPC) , average system 

frequency (ASF) model, trajectory optimization model. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

IND power plays an indispensable role in the energy 

transition and carbon neutral for its clean and 

efficient  [1] . As the mainstream form of wind 

energy utilization, the large -scale installation of the 

grid -following type of wind turbines (WTs) significantly 

impairs the inertia of power systems. The l ow inertia trend 

implies weak resistance to power disturbances, which raises a 

serious concern for the frequency stability of power systems .

To improve the frequency stability of low -inertia power 

systems, the WT is requested to provide proper frequency 

support . Fortunately, vector control allows its output power to 

be rapidly and precisely adjusted within a reasonable range. 

With this feature, t he additional active power control (AAPC) 

is enabled to directly regulate the WT active power in resp onse 

to the frequency excursion . In general, the existing AAPC can 

be roughly divided into three categories, namely the WT -view ,

the wind farm (WF) -view , and the system -view methods .

The WT -view AAPC is fully decentralized , intending to 

excavate the frequency support ability of the WT itself. The 

most popular WT -view AAPC method is the virtual -inertia 

control (VIC) . The WT with VIC generates an additional active 

power that depends on the frequency excursion, the rate of 

change of frequency (RoCoF ), or both of them. The VIC with 

fixed parameters was first proposed in  [2] , and this pioneering 

work revealed the potential of the WT in the grid frequency 

support . Considering the limitation of fixed parameters to 

varying scenarios, adaptive VIC attracts extensive attention  [3-

6]. In  [3]  and  [4] , the proportional -derivative coefficients of the 

VIC were adaptively adjusted according to the WTŌĆÖs releasable 

kinetic energy. Using the input -output feedback linearization 

method, a time -varying controller was designed to provide an 

inertial response in  [5] . Besides , an adaptive droop control of 

the WT was proposed  [6] . In  [7] , both the RoCoF and the WTŌĆÖs 

rotor spe ed were taken into consideration, aiming to mitigate 

the degradation of the VIC under severe contingencies. To 

avoid the strong dependence on the measured frequency and 

VIC coefficient s, a fast frequency regulation (FR) strategy of 

the WT based on variable power point trac king control was 

proposed in  [8] . Overall, the WT -view AAPC of the WT is self -

governed, simple and high ly reliab le, but lack s collaboration 

with other WTs and p erception of system demands .

Inspired by optimal control such as model predictive control 

(MPC) , the WF -view AAPC strategies have been extensively 

studied on the cooperation of WTs. In  [9] , the WF -view power 

reference was properly shared among WTs by solving an MPC 

problem , of which the optimization goal is minimizing wind 

energy loss, etc. Further, the cooperation of multiple WFs was 

included in the optimization model in  [10] . To deal with the 

inaccuracy of MPC prediction, a double -layer control 

framework was proposed to adequately exploit the kinetic 

energy of all WTs  [11] . In  [12] , the data -driven MPC method 

was proposed to cope with the challenge of complex and 

nonlinear WT dynamics. In the aspect of improving the 

computational efficiency, the distributed Newton method 

endowed the proposed method with a super -linear convergence 

rate in  [13] ; besides, the off -line look -up table was mentioned 

in  [14]  and WT s clustering simplification was proposed in  [15] .

The sys tem -view strategies expect to explore the feasible 

AAPC of WTs from the perspective of system frequency 

optimization. For example, the particle swarm algorithm was 

applied in  [16]  to derive the optimal FR control parameter of 

the WT with the goal of improving the frequency nadir as well 

as the average frequency. However, the optimization results 

were event -sensitive to some extent . In  [17] , a multi -layer MPC 

was proposed to achieve both objectives of dynamically 

optimal power support of the WF and the stability of WTs. 

Despite the improved performance, MPC may unduly consume 

# W

This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China 

(52007143) , China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2021M692526) and Key 

Research and Development Program of Shaanxi (2022GXLH -01 -06 ).

Y. Zhang, Z. Hao, S. Yang and B. Zhang are with State Key Laboratory of 

Electrical Insulation and Power Equipment, XiŌĆÖan Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 

China (e -mail: zyb970305@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {zhghao, songhaoyang, 

bhzhang}@xjtu.edu.cn). 2

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

the power support capacity of WTs in a short time. An optimal 

synthetic inertia control considering the variation of mechanical 

power of the WT is proposed in  [18] , which avoids the 

secondary drop of system frequency while satisfying the preset 

frequency nadir constraint. To minimize the RoCoF of power 

systems , ref.  [19]  presented a synthetic inertia controller for the 

WT based on the 2H optimal control method. However, the 

mechanical power of SGs was required to be measured in real -

time , which is difficult in practice .

To further exploit the potential of WT s on improving system 

frequenc y stability , th is paper propose s a system -view optimal 

AAPC of WTs . The m ain contributions of this work include: 

1) The optimal frequency trajectory that maximizes the 

frequency nadir is given and its universality is strictly 

proved. By decoupling the WT response and the 

frequency dynamics, the optimal frequency trajectory is 

efficiently solved by the trajectory optimiz ation model. 

Furthermore, the universality of the optimal frequency 

trajectory is strictly proved from the perspective of 

energy, regardless of the system parameters and the 

disturbance magnitudes. 

2) The feedback -form optimal AAPC of WTs is derived 

from the ASF model to achieve the optimal frequency 

trajectory. In addition, an exit strategy is designed as a 

supplement to the optimal AAPC to ensure the complete 

state recovery of the WT. 

3) The proposed method possesses the following two main 

advantages . In terms of control effect s, the optimal 

AAPC of WTs maximizes the system frequency nadir. It 

adaptively responds to power sys tem demands rather than 

blindly grabbing the WTŌĆÖs frequency support capability. 

In terms of application, event insensitivity makes the 

optimal AAPC of WTs can be solved and deployed based 

on the on -line rolling update under a hypothetic 

disturbance, which avoids the heavy post -event 

computational burden. 

The rest of the paper is orga nized as follows. Section II briefly 

introduces the system frequency and the WT model. Section III 

shows the design process of the optimal AAPC. The proof of 

the universality of the optimal AAPC is exhibited in Section IV. 

Then, the performance of the opti mal AAPC is verified in 

Section V and Section VI. Finally, Section VII draws a

conclusion. 

II. SYSTEM FREQUENCY AND WT MODELING 

A. Dynamic Model of Power System Frequen cy

When the power system suffers a power disturbance , the 

system frequency will deviate from the nominal value and 

undergo a transient process. Considering the frequency support 

of WTs , the frequency dynamic posts a large disturbance can 

be modeled as the following swing equation ( ) 2 ( ) ( ) ( ) m e d

d f t H P t P t P D f t dt 

’üä = ’üä + ’üä ŌłÆ ŌłÆ ’üä

, (1)

where H and D denote the normalized inertia constant and 

damping constant; ( ) f t ’üä is the frequency excursion; mP’üä and eP’üä

are the FR power of SGs and that of WTs , respectively ;dP 

> Fig. 1 ASF mod el considering the AAPC of WTs.

is the power disturbance. Considering that the frequency drop 

caused by a major power deficit is more common and severe, 

this paper focuses on the scenario of a frequency drop. 

During the primary frequency regulation (PFR), generator sŌĆÖ 

governors and AAPC of WTs actively respond to the power 

imbalance. This process can be described using an average 

system frequency (ASF) model  [20] , as shown in Fig. 1. As for 

the symbol i n Fig. 1, g and w denote the set of traditional 

SGs and WTs, respectively. ( ) gi G s is the FR dynamics the 

governor; ( ) wj G s is the AAPC of the WT. The subscript ŌĆ£ iŌĆØ

denotes the i-th SG, and the subscript ŌĆ£ jŌĆØ denotes the j-th WT, 

the same as below. 

In this paper, WTs are supposed to operate in the maximum 

power point tracking (MPPT) mode and only provide short -

term frequency support . Hence, the steady -state frequency 

excursion of the PFR is not affect ed . According to  [21] , it can 

be calculated as dss g

Pf D K

> ’Ć¬

’üä = ŌłÆ +

(2)

wh ere ( )g   

> ggi gi bi

K P R S ’āÄ

= ’āź

and gi P is the rated power of the SG ;1 gi R is the stead y-state 

gain factor of the governor of the SG .

Nevertheless, the transient performance of PFR can be 

effectively improved by optimizing the AAPC of WT s, which 

has been confirmed in extensive research. As one of the most 

significant indicators of PFR, t he frequency nadir reflects the 

worst transient freq uency drop post a power deficit. Therefore, 

this paper focu se s on exploring the optimal AAPC to maximize 

the frequency nadir. 

B. WT model 

In this paper, one of the most widely -used variables speed WT 

is considered, namely the doubly -fed induction generator 

(DFIG) WT. The turbine power of a WT is calculated by the 

following model. 2 3

0.5 ( , )t p wP R C v

’ü▓’ü░ ’ü¼ ’üó =

(3)3

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

where ’ü▓ is the air density; R is the turbine radius; wv is the 

wind speed; r wR v

’ü¼ ’üĘ= is the tip -speed ratio; r

’üĘ is the rotor 

speed; ’üó is the pitch angle; ( , )pC

’ü¼ ’üó  is the power coefficient, 

which is related to the tip -speed ratio and pitch angle. The 

widely used turbine efficiency model is adopted in this paper. 12.5 3

116 ( , ) 0.22( 0.4 5) ,1 0.035 0.08 1

> p

C e

> ’ü¼

’ü¼ ’üó ’üó’ü¼’ü¼ ’ü¼ ’üó ’üó

> ŌłÆ

= ŌłÆ ŌłÆ= ŌłÆ+ +

(4)

The mechanical dynamics of the WT depend on its turbine 

power and output power. According to  [22] , the one -mass 

model is adequate to investigat e the WT dynamics duri ng the 

frequency support, as follows. r r t eJ P P

’üĘ ’üĘ = ŌłÆ

(5)

where J is the inertia of the motion system of the WT .

C. Constraints in Frequency Support of WT s

The short -term frequency support of WT s is essentially to 

inject excess active power into the system at the expense of 

releasing the kinetic energy of the rotor. Inevitably, this 

additional active power will cause the speed of WT s to decrease 

and deviate from the steady state. Hence, the released energy is 

required to be injected back in to WTs for the rotor speed 

recovery. Ignoring the variation of the turbine power , the 

energy absorption characteristic of WTs is modeled as follows .0

( ) 0 

> ftet

P t dt ’üä =’ā▓

(6)

where 0t and ft are the start time and the end time of the 

freq ue ncy support of WTs , respectively . For simplicity , the start 

time 0t is set to 0 . To properly exploit the frequency support 

potential of WT s as well as ensure their safe operation, the end 

time of frequency support is recommended as 30s, which 

corresponds to the time scale of the PFR. 

In addition, operating constraints such as the outp ut power 

and the rotor speed unsurprisingly affect the frequency support 

performance of WT s. However, these operational constraints 

are generally event -sensitive. That is to say, whether constraints 

work or not is determined by the severity of the disturbance. 

Given the unpredictability of the disturbance, this paper expects 

to explore a more general and event -insensitive AAPC of WTs ,

thus avoiding heavy computation . Therefore, these event -

sensitive const raints of the WT are ignored when deriving the 

optimal AAPC , and only the ŌĆ£ energy absorptionŌĆØ characteristic 

is retained. Notably, the operating constraints of the WT are 

formally ignored in the theoretical derivation, which are 

completely retained in the simulation model. 

III . OPTIMAL AAPC DESIGN 

For the high -order ASF model shown in Fig. 1, it is intractable 

to directly derive the optimal AAPC of WT s that maximizes the 

freq ue ncy nadir. Hence , this paper explores the optimal AAPC 

of WT s based on reverse thinking . By decoupling the WT s

response and frequency dynamics, the theoretically optimal 

fre quency trajectory is freely explored. Then, the optimal 

AAPC is reversely constructed from the ASF model with the 

optimal frequency trajectory as the desi red control result.  

> Fig. 2 Framew ork of the optimal AAPC design.

The specific design framework is shown in Fig. 2. Firstly, the 

closed loop in the ASF model is broken and an aggregate 

additional power is introduced for decoupling the calculation of 

WT s response and frequency dynamics. Then, taking the 

additional power of WT s as the control variable, a trajectory 

optimization model is constructed to maximize the frequency 

nadir. Based on the time -domain solution of the trajectory 

optimization model, the optimal AAPC of WTs can be 

reversely constructed from the ASF model . Finally, c onsidering 

the model error caused by the ignorance of the variation of 

turbine power of WTs , a proper exit strategy is proposed as a 

supple ment to ensure the speed recovery of WTs .

A. Break ing the Closed Loop of the ASF Model 

For the high -order ASF model shown in Fig. 1, it is difficult 

to derive its analytical dynamic in the time domain . Meanwhile, 

the frequency support of WT s is coupled with the frequency ,

which causes an obscure impact of AAPC on the frequency 

nadir . The complex coupling and high -order prope rties make it 

challenging to directly solve the optimal AAPC of WT s.

Generally , WT s are considered to be able to output any 

reasonably desired power curve given their excellent 

controllability . Therefore, this paper simplifies the problem by 

breaking the closed loop of the ASF model. Specifically, the 

additional power of all WT s is aggregated as an independent 

controllable variable . As an independent control variable, the 

aggregated additional power of WTs exerts a unidirectional 

effect on the frequency, which makes it possible to fre ely 

explore the optimal control curve of WTs that maximizes the 

frequency nadir. 

B. Trajectory Optimization Model 

Taking the aggregate additional power of all WT s as the 

independent control variable, the trajectory optimization model 

can be constructed to solve the optimal control curve of WTs 

and the corresponding frequency trajectory in the time domain 

[23] . Different from the MPC which needs to solve the 

optimization model in real -time to generate single -step control, 

the trajectory optimization model derives the optimal control 

curve in the entire period at once . So, the trajectory optimization 4

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

model does not require real -time calculation. The construction 

of the trajectory optimization model is introduced below. 

First, a new state variable associated with the released energy 

of WT s is introduced in (7), aiming to convert the integral 

constraint shown in (6) into scope constraints. 0( ) ( ), [ , ]e fE t P t t t t’üä = ’üä ’āÄ

(7)

Then, the integral constraint in (6) can be converted in to 0( ) ( ) 0fE t E t ’üä ŌłÆ ’üä =

(8)

The dynamic constraints consist of the swing equation, 

governor dynamics, and Eq. (7), which can be expressed as 

follows. 1 2 0( ) ( ) ( ) , [ , ]e d ft t P t P t t t= + ’üä + ’āÄx Ax B B

(9)

where, ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 

> g

f t t tE t 

’üä’ā® ’ā╣’ā¬ ’ā║= ’üä’ā¬ ’ā║’ā¬ ’ā║’üä’ā½ ’ā╗

x x

,( ) 2 2 00 0 0  

> gggg

D D H HŌłÆ’ā® ’ā╣’ā¬ ’ā║= ’ā¬ ’ā║’ā¬ ’ā║’ā½ ’ā╗

CA B A 0 ,1

1 2 1

H’ā® ’ā╣’ā¬ ’ā║= ’ā¬ ’ā║’ā¬ ’ā║’ā½ ’ā╗

B 0

,2

1 2 0

HŌłÆ’ā® ’ā╣’ā¬ ’ā║= ’ā¬ ’ā║’ā¬ ’ā║’ā½ ’ā╗

B 0 ,( ) eP t ’üä

is the control variable ;gA ,gB ,gC ,gD , and gx

model the dynamics of governors , see Appendix A for details. 

Since the power system is supposed to operate at the steady -

state point initially , the initial values of all the state variables in 

(9) are 0. Combined with (8), the endpoint constraints of the 

trajectory optimization model are as follows. 0 00

( ) ( ) ( ) 0( )

> fg

f t E t E t t

’üä = ’üä = ’üä =’ā¼’ā»’āŁ’üä =’ā»’ā« x 0

(10 )

A static variable nadir f’üä is introduced, denoting the deviatio n

of the frequency nadir relative to the base frequency .nadir nadir Bf f f’üä = ŌłÆ

(11 )

where nadir f is the frequency nadir in the transient process of 

PFR ;Bf is the base value of the system frequency. 

Naturally, the frequency variation should not exceed this value 

in the transient process. 0( ) , [ , ]nadir ff t f t t t’üä ’é│ ’üä ’āÄ

(12 )

where ( ) f t ’üä and nadir f’üä are both negative. 

Finally, the following optimization objective is designed from 

a system perspectiv e, aiming to improve the frequency nadir. max 

> e
> nadir P

f

> ’üä

’üä

(13 )

Based on the above processing , the following trajectory 

optimization model can be constructed . Specifically, Eq. (13 ) is 

the optimization objective ; Eq. (9) is the dynamic constraint ;

Eq. (12 ) is the path constraint ; Eq. (10 ) is the endpoint 

condition s. Then, the optimal control curve and frequency 

trajectory in the time domain can be solved efficiently by the 

Gauss pseudospectral method  [24] , which is briefly introduced 

in Appendix B. 

The solution of the trajectory optimization model 

corresponding to the two -machine system in Section V is shown 

in Fig. 3. Sp ecifically, Fig. 3(a) shows the aggregate additional  

> Fig. 3 Time -domain solution of trajectory optimization model. (a) Optimal
> additional power of WTs. (b) Released energy of WTs. (c) Optimal frequency
> dynamics. (d) T rajectory of the equivalent WT.

power of WTs , which is positive in the initial stage to suppress 

the frequency drop, and negative in the later process for rotor 

speed recovery. Accordingly , the kinetic energy is released 

initially and then entirely absorbed from the grid, as shown in 

Fig. 3(b) . The frequency dynamics shown in Fig. 3(c) indicate 

the optimal control of W Ts maintains the frequency at a 

constant nadir , denoted as nadir f ’Ć¬

’üä , even in the process of energy 

absorption . Fig. 3(d) further shows the trajectory of the 

equivalent WT. Ignoring the variation of turbine power, WT s

theoretically recover to the steady -state operation at the end of 

frequency support, which is guaranteed by the constraint in (6).

C. Feedback Approximation 

The optimal frequency trajectory in the time domain is 

obtained by solving the trajectory optimization model . Then ,

the optimal feedback -form AAPC of WTs is derived based on 

reverse approximation, as follows. 

By observing the shape of the optimal frequency trajectory in 

Fig. 3(c), the frequency dynamics can be approximated as the 

following expone ntial decay form , as shown in Fig. 4.( ) (1 )bt 

f t a eŌłÆ

’üä = ŌłÆ

(14 )

When t ŌåÆ ’éź  , the frequency should be equal to nadir f ’Ć¬

’üä . So the 

coefficient a can be derived as follows. dnadir ss g

Pa f f D K

’üĪ’üĪ’Ć¬ ’Ć¬

= ’üä = ’üä = ŌłÆ +

(15 )

where nadir ss f f

’üĪ ’Ć¬ ’Ć¬

= ’üä ’üä .

Moreover , the initial RoCoF is calculated as 0 2

> dt

d f Pab dt H=

’üä = = ŌłÆ 

(16 )

Hence, the coefficient b can be derived as 2

> g

D Kb H

’üĪ+=

(17 )

Then the s-domain frequency dynamics can be expressed as ( ) (2 )

> dg

Pf s s Hs D K

’üĪ’üĪ’üä = ŌłÆ + +

(18 )5

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <   

> Fig. 4 Theoretical frequency dynamics and its exponential approximation .

Substituting the s-domain frequency dynamics into the ASF 

model shown in Fig . 1 , the aggregated optimal AAPC in the 

feedback form can be derived as follows. ( ) ( ) w g wG s G s K= ŌłÆ +

(19 )

where ( ) ( ) g 

> ggi i

G s G s’āÄ

= ’āź ,( )w gK D D K

’üĪ= ŌłÆ + .

The expression of the optimal AAPC of WTs is free from 

disturbance dP . Hence, the optimal AAPC for a given power 

system is independent of the magnitude of the power deficit ,

which is claimed as event insensitivity . Eq. (19 ) furt her 

indicates that the optimal AAPC of WTs consists of two parts. 

The part ( ) gG sŌłÆ makes WTs produce a power component 

opposite to the regulation of the mechanical power of SGs. 

From the system perspective, this power component simplifie s

the system frequency model to be first -order, thus eliminating 

the conventionally convex frequency nadir. On the other hand, 

according to the features of the governor of SGs, this power 

component is negative, which conduces to the speed recovery 

from the WT perspective. Another part wK produces a power 

component that increases linearly with the frequency variation, 

thereby adjusting the value of the frequency nadir. 

In the multi -WTs system, the aggregate d optimal AAPC 

needs to be reasonably allocated to each WT, as follows. ( ) ( ), 1w   

> wj jwwjj

G s c G s jc’āÄ

= ’āÄ’ā¼’ā»’āŁ =’ā»’ā«’āź

(20 )

where jc is the allocation factor of the WT .

In this paper, an allocation strategy considering both the 

releasable kinetic energy and the increasable active power of 

the WT is proposed, with details as shown in Appendix C.

Therefore, the output power of the WT during the frequency 

support period of 0[ , ]ft t t’āÄ is calculate d as 0 ( ) ( ), ej ej wj j wP P G s f s j= + ’üä ’āÄ

(21 )

wh ere 0ej P is the steady -state output power of the WT befor e

the power deficit disturbance; jf’üä is the local frequency of the 

WT. It indicates that the proposed optimal AAPC can be 

deployed locally to WTs like the classic VIC, which shows the 

good application potential of the optimal AAPC. 

Moreover, it should be emphasized that the consistency 

between the optimal AAPC and the time -domain control relies 

on the exponential decay form of (14 ) is a good approximation 

of the optimal frequency trajectory. That is to say, the shape of 

the optimal frequency dynamics shown in Fig.3 (c) should be 

universal for the trajectory optimization model of different 

power systems and disturbance magnitude . The proof of the 

required universality is given in Section IV .

D. Exit Strategy of Frequency Support 

Du e to the coupling of rotor speed and turbine power, the WT 

is usually unable to recover to the steady state at the end of the 

optimal AAPC . In other words , there is a certain deviation 

between the trajectory of WT derived from the constant turbine 

power and the actual trajectory. To ensure the state recovery of 

the WT , the following exit strategy is designed .

For any WT regulated by the optimal AAPC, the following 

three events will trigger the exit strategy .min 

( ) ( ) ( ) ej MPPTj f rj rP t P t t t t

’üĘ ’üĘ’éŻ ’é│ ’éŻor or 

(22 )

where wj ’āÄ ;MPPTj P denotes the MPPT power of the WT; rj 

’üĘ

denotes the rotor speed of the WT; min 

> r

’üĘ denotes the lower 

limit of rotor speed of the WT. 

Denote the activation moment of the exit strategy as ej t , the 

output power of the WT for the exit strategy is designed as ( ) (1 ) ( ) ( ), ej j tj j MPPTj ej P t P t P t t t

’ü¦’ü¦= ŌłÆ + ’é│

(23 )

where j

’ü¦ is a coefficient with a value range of [0,1] j

’ü¦ ’āÄ .

To eliminate the power saltation caused by control switching, 

the coefficient j

’ü¦ is designed as follows: substituting output 

power of the WT at the ej t t= into (23 ) to derive the value of j

’ü¦

, if it exceeds the limit s, take boundary value. ( ) ( )( ) ( )      

> ej ej tj ej jMPPTj ej tj ej

P t P tP t P t

’ü¦ ŌłÆ= ŌłÆ

(24 )

IV. UNIVERSALITY OF OPTIMAL FREQUENCY TRAJECTORY 

As mentioned above, it is necessary to prove that the shape of 

the optimal frequency trajectory in Fig. 3(c) is general. Hence, 

the proof is given as follows .

Integrating the swing equation at the time interval 0[ , ]ft t t’āÄ

and combining the constraints shown in (6), one obtains ( ) 2 2   

> mdfff

D E P t f t SH H

> ’üä

ŌłÆ’üä + =

, (25 )

where 0

( )  

> ftft

S f t dt ’üä = ’üä’ā▓

,0

( )  

> ftmmt

E P t dt = ’üä’ā▓ .mE

is the FR energy of SGs at the time interval 0[ , ]ft t t’āÄ ;( )ff t ’üä

is the terminal frequency at ft t= .

Theorem 1: Optimal AAPC of WTs must maximize the FR 

energy of SGs. 

Proof: Assuming the FR energy of SGs is not equal under two 

different AAPC of WTs, it is advisable to set 1 20 m mE E’Ć╝ ’Ć╝

. (26 )

In the power deficit cases, both sides of (25 ) are less than zero, 

then one obtains 2 1 02 2     

> mdfmdf

E P t E P t H H

’ü½ŌłÆ ŌłÆ= ’Ć╝

(27 )

wher e0 1

## ’ü½’Ć╝ ’Ć╝ .

Denot e the frequency at the time interval 0[ , ]ft t t’āÄ under 1mE

and 2mE as 1 ( ) f t’üä and 2 ( ) f t’üä , respectively. One obtains 2 2 1 1( ) ( ( ) )2 2   

> ffff

D Df t S f t SH H

’ü½’üä ’üä’üä + = ’üä +

(28 )6

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

> Fig. 5 Frequency trajectory characteristic.

An obvious case satisfying the above equation is 2 1 0( ) ( ), [ , ]ff t f t t t t

’ü½’üä = ’üä ’āÄ

(29 )

Therefore, the frequency nadir satisfies 2 1 1nadir nadir nadir f f f

’ü½’üä = ’üä ’ĆŠ ’üä 

. (30 )

The above analysis shows that there certainly exists a higher 

frequency nadir under the larger FR energy of SGs. Therefore, 

the optimal AAPC of WTs must maximize the FR energy of 

SGs, which is an unknown constant under a certain power 

deficit , denoted as max 

> m

E .

Theorem 2 : The frequency nadir can not be lower than the 

terminal frequency ( )ff t ’üä .

Proof: It can be proved by contradiction. Suppose there is a 

frequency nadir below the terminal frequency, as shown in the 

blue solid line in Fig. 5.( )nadir ff f t ’üä ’Ć╝ ’üä 

(31 )

According to Theorem 1 , the right -hand side of (25 ) is a 

constant with max  

> mm

E E= , denoted as C . Therefore, the optimal 

frequency dynamics satisf y( ) ( 2 )f ff t D H S C’üä’üä + =

(32 )

where max 

( ) 2 m d fC E P t H= ŌłÆ .

Particularly, the envelope dynamics of the frequency refers 

that the frequency drops rapidly to the frequency nadir nadir f’üä

with the initial RoCoF and then maintains until terminal time, 

as shown in the gray solid line in Fig. 5. Co rrespondingly, the 

integral of this frequency dynamics is denoted as fS’üä .

Therefore, for any frequency trajectory with the c haracteristics 

shown in (31 ), one can obtain ( ) ( 2 ) ( 2 )f f nadir fC f t D H S f D H S C’üä ’üä= ’üä + ’ĆŠ ’üä + =

, (33 )C C

’ü©=

, (34 )

where 0 1

’ü©’Ć╝ ’Ć╝ as C and C are both less than 0; the integral 

of 0.5( )f f c nadir S t t f’üä = + ’üä ,c f xt t t= ŌłÆ ;xt is the time to reach 

the nadir of the envelope frequency trajectory .

For any (0,1) 

’ü© ’āÄ  , the following frequency dynamics with a 

higher frequency nadir can be easily obtained within the 

envelope trajectory, which s atisfies the constraint of (32 ).

Specifically, the superior frequency dynamics have the same 

shape as the envelope frequency trajectory, as shown in the red 

solid line in Fig. 5. Thus, the higher frequency nadir is 

calculated as nadir nadir f f

’üŁ’Ć¬

’üä = ’üä

(35 )

According to (34 ), the scale factor ’üŁ can be derived as 2 2 2 2 2 22 2

4 42 4 4( )     

> ffffcfcfc

H D t HDt D t H Dt D t HDt HDt D t t

’ü©’ü©’ü©’ü©’üŁ+ + ŌłÆ+ ŌłÆ + ŌłÆ += ’Ć¬ ŌłÆ

(36 )

Then, the value range of ’üŁ is derived as (0,1) 

’üŁ ’āÄ 22

2 (2 ) 0( )2 (2 ) 1( )    

> fffcfefc

H Dt H Dt XD t tH Dt H Dt YD t t

’üŁ’üŁ’ā¼ + ŌłÆ + ŌłÆ’ā» = ’ĆŠ’Ć¬ ŌłÆ’ā»’āŁ + ŌłÆ + +’ā» = ’Ć╝’ā» ’Ć¬ ŌłÆ’ā«

(37 )

where 2 2 2

( ) 4 ( ) 0c f cfX D t t HD t t

’ü©’ü©= ŌłÆ + ŌłÆ ’ĆŠ2 2 2

(1 ) ( ) 4(1 ) ( ) 0c f cfY D t t DH t t

’ü©’ü©= ŌłÆ ŌłÆ + ŌłÆ ŌłÆ ’ĆŠ

.

Therefore, there is always a higher frequency nadir than the 

primary nadir if it exceeds the terminal frequency, which 

indicates that the optimal frequency nadir should not exceed the 

terminal frequency. 

Based on Theorem 1 and 2, the frequency nadir maximization 

is equivalent to minimizing the frequency integral .max max ( ) min nadir f ff f t S’üä’üä ’āø ’üä ’āø

(38 )

Obviously, the minimum frequency integral is that the 

frequenc y drops rapidly to the frequency nadir with initial 

RoCoF and then maintains to the terminal time of ft t= , as 

shown in Fig. 3(c). The above analysis does not presuppose any 

information about power systems and disturbances, so the 

conclusion is universal. 

V. CASE STUD Y I: A TWO -MACHINE POWER SYSTEM 

A two -machine power system consisting of a n SG and a WT is 

first constructed to validate the proposed optimal AAPC , as shown 

in Fig. 6. The total active load is 150MW . The WT is an aggregate 

model consisting of 20 5MW ’é┤ DFIG -based WTs with 

parameters shown in TABLE I , and the detailed model can refer to 

[25] . G1 is the steam turbine with a simplified governor model as 

shown in (39 ), and the key parameters are listed in TABLE I I.(1 )( ) (1 )  

> mHRgR

K F T s G s R T s 

+= ŌłÆ +

(39 )

Based on the system parameters and the hypothetic power 

disturbance of 0.1 d LP P= , i.e. 15MW , the trajectory optimization 

model is constructed and solved, deriving the ratio factor of 1.186 

## ’üĪ = 

. Then the value of wK in the optimal AAPC of the WF 

is calculated to be 14.1 ŌłÆ . Combined with ( ) gG s , the optimal 

AAPC of the WT is obtained as ( ) ( ) w g wG s G s K= ŌłÆ + .

A. Properties of the Optimal AAPC 

Based on the above two -machine system, this subsection reveals 

the essential properties of the optimal AAPC . The wind speed of 

the WT is 9m/s in this subsection . The power disturbance is set as 

an active load surge of 15MW, and the output characteristics of the 

proposed optimal AAPC are shown in Fig. 7. The green solid line 

in Fig. 7 shows the additional power component produced by the 

term ( ) gG sŌłÆ , which is negative and exactly offsets the increment 7

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

in the me chanical power of G1. In contrast, the term wK produces       

> Fig. 6 Two -machine power system.
> TABLE I
> PARAMETERS OF THE WIND TURBINE
> Sym bol Description Value n

S 

> Rated capacity (MVA) 5.556 n

P   

> Rated power (MW) 5max
> eP
> Maximum power (MW) 5min
> eP
> Minimum power (MW) 0n

’üĘ  

> Rated rotor speed (rpm) 12.1 min
> r

’üĘ        

> Minimum rotor speed (p.u.) 0.7 J
> Rotor inertia ( 2
> kg m ’āŚ)16,801,544
> TABLE II
> PARAMETERS OF THE SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR
> Symbol Des cription G1 n

S 

> Rat ed capacity (MVA) 200 m

K    

> mechanical power gain factor 0.85 gH
> Inertia time constant (s) 4.2 R
> governor regulation 0.05 H

F  

> Fraction of high -pressure turbine 0.3 R

T 

> Re heat time constant (s) 8

a positive power component to support the system frequency, as 

shown by the blue solid line in Fig. 7. These two opposite 

components cause the overall additional power of the WT to 

increase first for grid frequency support and then decrease for 

speed recovery, as shown by the red solid line in Fig. 7.

Fig. 8 further compares the theoretically time -domain solution 

of the trajectory optimization model and the simulation results of 

the proposed optimal AAPC. As a feedback approximation, the 

output power dynamic of the proposed AAPC is consistent with 

the optimal time -domain control curve derived from the traj ectory 

optimization model, as shown in Fig. 8(a). Correspondingly, the 

system frequency presents the expected first -order shape, and the 

frequency nadir is the same as that of the trajectory optimization 

model, as shown in Fig. 8(b). As the proposed AAPC i ncludes a 

power component that promotes rotor speed recovery, the rotor 

speed first decreases and then recovers, as shown in Fig. 8(c). 

However, since the trajectory optimization model ignores wind 

energy losses, the actual rotor speed does not recover to the steady -

state value as expected in theoretical results. This is why a proper 

exit strategy is needed. 

B. Performance of the Exit Strategy 

The exit strategy aims to ensure the state recovery of the WT 

without deteriorating the frequency nadir. This sub section 

verifies the performance of the proposed exit strategy, and the 

MPPT -based exit strategy in  [16]  is used as a comparison. 

Admittedly, the MPPT -based exit strategy eliminates power 

saltation if the output power curve intersects the MPPT curve.      

> Fig. 7 Active power output characteristics of the optimal AAPC of WTs .
> Fig. 8Comparison of proposed AAPC and trajectory optimization model.
> (a)Power support of the WF. (b) System frequency. (c) Rotor speed of the W F.

However, this case is not inevitable . Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 show the 

comparison between the proposed exit strategy and the MPPT -

based exit strategy in the above two scenarios. Fig. 9 indicates 

that both the proposed exit strategy and MPPT -based method 

can smoothly switch to the MPPT mode for speed recovery 

when the output power curve intersects with the MPPT curve. 

Howeve r, when the output power curve does not intersect with 

the MPPT curve, the MPPT -based exit strategy will cause the 

output power of the WT to plummet to the MPPT curve at the 

moment of activation, as shown by the blue dotted line in Fig. 

10 (a). As a result, this power plummet causes a secondary 

frequency drop, as shown by the blue dotted line in Fig. 10 (b). 

In contrast, the proposed exit strategy maintains the smoothness 

of the output power while achieving speed recovery as shown 

by the orange solid line in Fig. 10 . To conclude , the proposed 

exit strategy is effective and ensures the stable operation of the 8

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <    

> Fig. 9Validation of exit strategy with intersection point. (a) Output power of
> the WT. (b) Grid frequency dynamics.
> Fig. 1 0Validation of exit strategy without intersection point. (a) Output power
> of the WT. (b) Grid frequency dynamics.

WF without deteriorating the frequency nadir. 

C. Event Insensitivity 

As analyzed in Section III .C , the optimal AAPC for a given 

power system is theoretically free from the magnitude of the power 

deficit, namely event insensitivity. Fig. 1 1 shows the frequency 

dynamics under various power disturbances, and the optimal 

AAPC is derived from a hypothetic power deficit of 0.1 d LP P= .

The referred frequency na dir can be solved based on the trajectory 

optimization model , denoted as nadir f ’Ć¬

’üä . The results indicate that 

the optimal AAPC makes the grid frequency exhibit the desired 

first -order dynamics regardless of the disturbance size. The convex 

frequency nadir is eliminated and the frequency nadir can be 

improved as the ideal solution of the trajectory optimization model. 

Considering the operating constraints of the actual WT, the 

event -insensitive range of the optimal AAPC should be limit ed. 

Taking the frequency nadir as the indicator, Fig. 12 further tests the 

optimal AAPC under a series of power deficits. The results show 

> Fig. 11 Frequency dynamics in the event -insensitive range of optimal AAPC.
> Fig. 12 Validation of the event in sensitivity of the optimal AAPC.
> Fig. 13 Impact of wind speed of the WT on the event -insensi tive range of the
> optimal AAPC.

that within a certain range of power disturbance, the optimal AAPC 

can improve the frequency nadir as expected. However, if the FR 

demand under the extremely severe power deficit scenarios that 

exceed the frequency support capability of the WT, the 

performance of the optimal AAPC will inevitably deviate from the 

reference. Despite performance degradation, the comparison in 

Fig. 12 indicates that the optimal AAPC is still significantly better 

than the classic VIC under severe scenarios . Therefore, the optimal 

AAPC of the WT is event -insensitive over a relatively wide range 

of scenarios .

To quantitate the performance degradation of the optimal 

AAPC, the indicator is defined as follows. % 

> nadir nadir rnadir

f fe f

> ’Ć¬’Ć¬

’üä ŌłÆ ’üä = ’é┤’üä

(40 )

In this paper, the event -insensitive range is adopted as 5% re ’éŻ .

Under this criterion, Fig. 1 3 shows the impact of the wind speed of 

the WT on the event -insensitive range of the optimal AAPC , where 9

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < max 

> d

P

denotes the upper limit of the event -insensitive range. The 

results indicate that the optimal AAPC of WTs is event -insensitive 

to a general major -power disturbance such as a 10% load surge at 

different wind speeds. 

The above resul ts indicate that the optimal AAPC derived from 

a specified disturbance is also optimal for divers e disturbance 

magnitudes. Hence, the optimal AAPC of WTs can be solved and 

deployed based on the on -line rolling update under a hypothetical 

disturbance, avoid ing the heavy post -event computational burden. 

VI. CASE STUD Y II: IEEE 39 -BUS SYSTEM 

The IEEE 39 -bus system shown in Fig. 14 is constructed to 

verify the effectiveness of the proposed AAPC in the large -scale 

power system. Specifically, equivalent SG of the external system 

G1 and steam turbine s G2 /G5/G6/G7/G8/G9 are equipped with 

IEEEG1 type of governor; hydro turbine s G3/ G10 are equipped 

with HYGOV type of governor; gas turbine G4 is equipped with 

GAST type of governor. The detailed mode l of the above 

governors can be found in  [26] . In addition, 5 aggregate WTs are 

connected to the system at Bus 8/14/1 6/18 /22, denoted as WT1 ,

WT2 , WT3 , WT4 , and WT5 respectively. 

Each aggregated WT is composed of 80 5MW ’é┤ DFIG -based 

WTs, and the wind speed is set to 6.5m/s in WT1 , 7.5m/s in WT2 ,

8.5m/s in WT3 , and 9.5m/s in WT4 , and 10.5m/s in WT5 , to model 

the diversity of operating conditions of WTs . The model and 

parameters of the WT are the same as in Section V. 

First, the trajectory optimization model is constructed and solved, 

and the aggregated optimal AAPC of all the WTs can be obtained ,

which needs to be reasonably allocated to each WT. 

Correspondingly , the allocation factors of WTs are derived as 1 0.08 c =

,2 0.21 c = ,3 0.374 c = ,4 0.248 c = ,5 0.0875 c = .

The performance of the proposed optimal AAPC is compared 

with the following three inertial control strategies .

Strategy 1 : Classical VIC in  [2] , that is, the coefficients of the 

proportional -derivative (PD) control ler remain constant. In this 

paper, 20 fk = , and 10 in k = .

Strategy 2 : Adaptive VIC in  [3] . Specifically, the coefficients of 

VIC are adaptively adjusted according to the releasable kinetic 

energy of the WT. 

Strategy 3: Optimal temporary frequency support control 

(TFSC) in  [16] . The differential controller in the traditional VIC is 

replaced with a first -order low -pass filter. 

Then, the following two typical scenarios of power shortage are 

designed to verify the performance of the above methods. 

Scenario 1 : Active load of the system surges by 10% .

Scenario 2 : G7 trips. 

For a large -scale power system, the grid frequency inevitably 

appears spatial and temporal distribution differences post a major 

power deficit, taking into account the oscillation of SGs. Given 

this, a widely used concept is introduced in this paper, namely the 

frequency of the center of inertia (CoI), whi ch can reflect the 

average frequency dynamics of the grid. According to  [27] , the 

frequency of the CoI is calculated as follows. gg   

> gi gi iiCoI gi gi i

H S ff H S

> ’āÄ’āÄ

= ’āź’āź

(41 )  

> Fig. 14 Modified IEEE 39 -bus system.
> Fig. 15 Frequency dynamics of SGs and CoI. (a) Scenario 1. (b) Scenario 2.

Fig. 15 shows the frequency dynamics of each SGs and the C oI 

in scenario 1 and scenario 2 , with WTs equipped with the optimal 

AAPC. It can be seen that the frequency of each SGs shows certain 

oscillation characteristics at the initial stage of a power disturbance. 

Fortunately, t he frequency of the CoI eliminates the frequency 

difference caused by the oscillatory behavior of SGs and properly 

depicts the average grid frequency dynamics, as shown in the red 

solid line in Fig. 15 . Hence, it is reasonable to model the overall 

grid dynamics by the frequency of the CoI. If there is no special 

description, the frequency in the following refers to that of the CoI. 10 

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <                     

> Fig. 16 Comparison of system frequency dynamics under different control
> strategies. (a) Load surge. (b) Generator tripping.
> TABLE III
> COMPARISON OF FREQUENCY NADIR INSCENARIO 1&2 (Hz) nadir f’üä
> Scenario 1 Scenario 2
> No FR -0.4133 -0.3304
> Stra tegy 1 -0.3193 -0.2630
> Strategy 2 -0.2936 -0.2410
> Strategy 3 -0.2950 -0.2515
> Proposed AAPC -0.245 8-0.2068

Moreover, it should be noted that the frequency of the CoI is only 

used for result display. The dependent frequency of the 

implementation of the optimal AAPC is still measured locally. 

The grid frequency dynamics with the proposed control strategy 

and Strategies 1 -3 in Scenarios 1 &2 are compared in Fig. 16 , and 

the deviation of frequency nadirs in the transie nt process are listed 

in TABLE III , where ŌĆ£No FRŌĆØ denotes that WTs do not provide 

frequency support. The results in TABLE III indicate that the 

tem porary FR of WTs does significantly improve the frequency 

nadir of the power system post a major power deficit. Taking 

Scenario 1 as an example, the frequency nadir deviation with WTs 

under the above control strategies is improved by 22.74 %

(Strategy 1 ), 28.96 % ( Strategy 2 ), 28.62 % ( Strategy 3 ), 4 0.53 %

(optimal AAPC ) respectively, compared with ŌĆ£No FRŌĆØ. 

Furthermore, the comparison results indicate that the proposed 

optimal AAPC is effective in a large -scale power system with 

multiple WTs, which contributes to a higher frequency nadir 

compared with the existing control strategies. Specifically, 

compared with strategies 1 -3, the optimal AAPC of WTs improves 

the frequency nadir devi ation in the above two scenarios by 

23.02 % and 21.37 % ( Strategy 1 ), 16.28 % and 14.19 % ( Strategy 

2), 16.68 % and 1 7.78 % ( Strategy 3 ), respectively .

To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed allocation 

strategy among WTs, it is compared with the avera ge allocation 

principle. The dynamics of the system frequency and WTs with the    

> Fig. 1 7Dynamics of WTs under different allocation strategies. (a) Output
> power of WT5 under high wind speed . (b) Rotor speed of WT1 under low wind
> speed. (c) System frequency.

proposed allocation strategy and average allocation in Scenario 1 

are compared as shown in Fig. 17 . The results show that the 

proposed allocation strategy takes into account the differences in 

operating conditio ns and power support margins of WT s. The 

reasonable allocation factor effectively avoids the over -lower -limit 

of the rotor speed of the WT with low wind speed ( WT 1), as shown 

in Fig. 17 (b); a s well as avoids the over -upper limit s of the output 

power of the WT with high wind speed ( WT 5), as shown in Fig. 

17 (a). Over -lower limit s may cause concerns about the safe 

operation of the WT . As for the over -upper -limit of the power 

reference, although the limiter ensures a bearable actual output 

power of the WF, the deviation of the output power from the 

expected value will inevitably result in a degradation in control 

performance, i.e. deteriorating the frequency nadir, as shown in 

Fig. 17 (c). The above results show that the proposed allocation 

strategy among WT s imp roves the transient frequency stability of 

the power system while ensuring the safe operation of the WT. 

VII. CONCLUSION 

In this paper, a system -view optimal AAPC of WTs is 

proposed to provide fast frequency support for power system s.

Different from the widely used VIC methods , this paper 

explores the optimal frequency support mode of WTs based on 

the system demands . As a feedback approximation , the 

proposed AAPC of WTs inherits the optimal performance on 

maximizing the frequency nadir of the trajectory optimization 

model . More importantly, the universality of the reverse 

approximation is strictly proved. Besides , the event 

insensitivity of the proposed method avoids the dependence on 

the disturbance magnitude. Hence, the optimization c alculation 

can be preposed by rolling implementation to avoid the heavy 11 

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

post -event communication and computation burden . Extensive 

simulation results prove that the proposed method can 

effectively improve the system frequency stability post a major 

power deficit .

APPENDIX A

DYNAMIC OF THE GOVERNOR SYSTEM 

In the ASF model, the dynamics of separate governor is 

retained, and the FR can be expressed as ( ) ( ) ( ) mi gi P s G s f s’üä = ’üä

(42 )

where gi ’āÄ .

Ignoring the nonlinearity of governors, the following state -

space form of FR of governors can be derived from (42 ).( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )       

> gi gi gi gi mi gi gi gi

t t f t P t t D f t 

’üä = ’üä + ’üä’ā¼’ā»’āŁ’üä = ’üä + ’üä’ā»’ā«

x A x BC x

(43 )

where gi ’āÄ ;1imgi ’é┤

’āÄx are the state variables of the i-th 

governor; i im mgi ’é┤

’āÄA ,1imgi ’é┤

’āÄB ,1 imgi ’é┤

’āÄC , and gi D ’āÄ

are the coefficient matrices; im is the orders of the governor. 

Then, the overall dynamics of the governor system can be 

expressed as follows. ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )       

> gggggggg

t t f t P t t D f t 

’üä = ’üä + ’üä’ā¼’ā»’āŁ’üä = ’üä + ’üä’ā»’ā«

x A x BC x

(44 )

where 12

> ggggM

’ā® ’ā╣’ā¬ ’ā║’ā¬ ’ā║= ’ā¬ ’ā║’ā¬ ’ā║’ā½ ’ā╗

xxxx

,12

> ggggM

’ā® ’ā╣’ā¬ ’ā║’ā¬ ’ā║= ’ā¬ ’ā║’ā¬ ’ā║’ā½ ’ā╗

AAAA ,12

> ggggM

’ā® ’ā╣’ā¬ ’ā║’ā¬ ’ā║= ’ā¬ ’ā║’ā¬ ’ā║’ā½ ’ā╗

BBBB ,’üø ’üØ1 2g g g gM =C C C C

,g 

> ggi i

D D’āÄ

= ’āź

APPENDIX B

PRINCIPLE OF THE GAUSS PSEUDOSPECTRAL METHOD 

In the Gauss pseudospectral method, the interpolation points 

are discretely distributed in the time interval of [ 1,1] 

’ü┤ ’āÄ ŌłÆ  .

Hence, the time interval needs to be converted into 00 0

2 ff f

t ttt t t t

’ü┤ += ŌłÆŌłÆ ŌłÆ

(45 )

Taking the roots of the K -order Legendre polynomial as the 

discrete points, denoted as 1 2{ }K

’ü┤ ’ü┤ ’ü┤= , the K -order 

Lagrangian interpolation of the state variable is as follows. 0

( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 

> Kiii

x X L x

’ü┤ ’ü┤’ü┤ ’ü┤

> =

’é╗ = ’āź

(46 )

where 0, 

( ) K ji j j i i j

L

’ü┤ ’ü┤’ü┤ ’ü┤ ’ü┤= ’é╣

ŌłÆ= ’āĢ ŌłÆ is the basic function of Lagrangian 

interpolation. 

Similarly, the control variables should also be discretized. 0

( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 

> Kiii

u U L u

’ü┤ ’ü┤’ü┤ ’ü┤

> =

’é╗ = ’āź

(47 )

Notably, the endpoint of the interval 1f

’ü┤ = ŌłÆ  is not invol ved 

in the above interpolation points, whereas constraints related to 

the final value of the states are common. Therefore, an 

estimation for fX needs to be constructed by the Gauss 

integration algorithm. First, the theoretical final value of the 

state can be derived from the dynamics of the system. 10 1

( ) ( ) ( ( ), ( ), ) fx x f x u d

’ü┤ ’ü┤’ü┤ ’ü┤ ’ü┤ ’ü┤

> ŌłÆ

= + ’ā▓

(48 )

Then, its discrete estimation can be calculated by 00 01

( ) ( ) ( ( ), ( ), ; , )2    

> Kffkkkfk

X X f X U t t

’ü┤ ’ü┤’ü┤ ’ü┤’üĘ ’ü┤ ’ü┤ ’ü┤

> =

ŌłÆ= + ’āź

(49 )

where k

’üĘ is Gaussian weight. 

Then, the differential of the state variable is approximated by 

interpolation, as follows. 0 0

( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )        

> KKkkikiki iii

x X L X D X 

’ü┤ ’ü┤’ü┤ ’ü┤’ü┤ 

> ==

’é╗ = =’āź ’āź

(50 )

where ( 1) K K’é┤ +

’āÄD is the differential matrix formed by the 

differential of the basic functions of Lagrangian interpolation. 

Finally, the differential equations of the dynamic system can 

be converted to the following algebraic equations. 000

( ) ( ( ), ( ), ; , ) 02     

> Kfki ikkfi

t tD X f X U t t

’ü┤’ü┤ ’ü┤ ’ü┤

> =

ŌłÆŌłÆ =’āź

(51 )

The continuous path constraint s are also discretized into the 

following form. 0( ( ), ( ), ; , ) 0k k k fC X U t t

’ü┤ ’ü┤ ’ü┤ ’éŻ

(52 )

So far, the infinite -dimensional continuous trajectory 

optimization problem has been transformed into a nonlinear 

programming (NLP) problem, for which there are many 

efficient solvers, such as the sequential quadratic programming 

(SQP) method  [28] .

APPENDIX C

ALLOCATION STRATEGY OF MULTI -WT S

To quantify the frequency support capability of the WT, the 

following two indices are introduced, denoting its maximum 

releasable kinetic energy and the maximum increasable active 

power. max min 0max max 0

,   

> kj kj kj wej ej ej

E E E jP P P

’ā¼’üä = ŌłÆ’ā» ’āÄ’āŁ’üä = ŌłÆ’ā»’ā«

(53 )

where 2

0.5 k rE J

’üĘ= is the kinetic energy of the WT. The 

subscript ŌĆ£0ŌĆØ, ŌĆ£minŌĆØ, and ŌĆ£maxŌĆØ denote the initial value, 

minimum value, and maximum value, respectively. 

Larger max 

> kj

E’üä and max 

> ej

P’üä indicates a stronger frequency 

support capacit y, but they are irreconcilable, as shown in Fig. 

5. It can be seen that sufficient kinetic energy means that the 

WT operates at a high wind speed, whereas the increasable 

power is limited for the large steady -state power, and vice versa. 

Therefore, the all ocation factor of WTs is designed as max max max max 

min{ , },      

> ww
> kj ej jwkj ej jj

E Pc jE P 

> ’Ć¬’āÄ’āÄ

’üä ’üä= ’āÄ’üä ’üä’āź ’āź

(54 a), 

> w
> jjwjj

cc jc

> ’Ć¬’Ć¬’āÄ

= ’āÄ

# ’āź

(54 b)12 

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

REFERENCES 

[1] G. W. E. C, ŌĆ£Global Wind Report 2022,ŌĆØ Global Wind Energy Council, 

Brussels, Belgium, Tech. Rep., 2022. 

[2] J. Morren, S. W. H. de Haan, W. L. Kling and J. A. Ferreira, ŌĆ£Wind turbines 

emulating inertia and supporting primary frequency control,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. 

Power Syst. , vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 433 -434, Feb. 2006. 

[3] J. Lee, E. Muljadi, P. Srensen , and Y. C. Kang, ŌĆ£Releasable kinetic energy 

based inertial control of a DFIG wind power plant,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Sustain. 

Energy , vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 279 ŌĆō288, Jan. 2016. 

[4] X. Lyu, Y. Jia, and Z. Dong, ŌĆ£Adaptive frequency responsive control for 

wind farm consideri ng wake interaction,ŌĆØ J. Modern Power Syst. Clean 

Energy , vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 1066 ŌĆō1075, Sep. 2021. 

[5] M. Toulabi, A. S. Dobakhshari, and A. M. Ranjbar, ŌĆ£An adaptive feedback 

linearization approach to inertial frequency response of wind turbines,ŌĆØ 

IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy , vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 916 ŌĆō926, Jul. 2017. 

[6] Q. Jiang et al., ŌĆ£Time -Sharing frequency coordinated control strategy for 

PMSG -Based wind turbine,ŌĆØ IEEE J. Emerg. Sel. Topics Circuits Syst. , vol. 

12, no. 1, pp. 268 ŌĆō278, Mar. 2022 .

[7] A. Ashouri -Zadeh and M. Toulabi, ŌĆ£Adaptive virtual inertia controller for 

DFIGs considering nonlinear aerodynamic efficiency,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. 

Sustain. Energy , vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 1060 ŌĆō1067, Apr. 2021. 

[8] D. Yang, G. -G. Yan, T. Zheng, X. Zhang and L. Hua, ŌĆ£Fast Frequency 

Respons e of a DFIG Based on Variable Power Point Tracking Control,ŌĆØ 

IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl. , vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 5127 -5135, July -Aug. 2022. 

[9] S. Huang, Q. Wu, W. Bao, N. D. Hatziargyriou, L. Ding, and F. 

Rong,ŌĆ£Hierarchical optimal control for synthetic inertial resp onse of wind 

farmbased on alternating direction method of multipliers,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. 

Sustain. Energy , vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 25 ŌĆō35, Jan. 2021. 

[10] W. Bao, Q. Wu, L. Ding, S. Huang, and V. Terzija, ŌĆ£A hierarchical inertial 

control scheme for multiple wind farms wit h BESSs based on ADMM,ŌĆØ 

IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy , vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 1461 ŌĆō1472, Apr. 2021. 

[11] L. Guo et al., ŌĆ£Double -Layer Feedback Control Method for Synchronized 

Frequency Regulation of PMSG -Based Wind Farm,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Sustain. 

Energy , vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 2423 -2435, Oct. 2021. 

[12] Z. Guo and W. Wu, ŌĆ£Data -Driven Model Predictive Control Method for 

Wind Farms to Provide Frequency Support,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Energy Convers. ,

vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 1304 -1313, June 2022. 

[13] Z. Wang and W. Wu, ŌĆ£Coordinated control method for DFIG -based wind 

farm to p rovide primary frequency regulation service,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Power 

Syst. , vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 2644 ŌĆō2659, May 2018. 

[14] A. S. Ahmadyar and G. Verbi╦ćc, ŌĆ£Coordinated operation strategy of wind 

farms for frequency control by exploring wake interaction,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. 

Sustain. Energy , vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 230 ŌĆō238, Jan. 2017. 

[15] S. Ma, H. Geng, G. Yang, and B. C. Pal, ŌĆ£Clustering -based coordinated 

control of large -scale wind farm for power system frequency support,ŌĆØ 

IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy , vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 1555 ŌĆō1564, Oc t. 2018. 

[16] M. Sun et al., ŌĆ£Novel Temporary Frequency Support Control Strategy of 

Wind Turbine Generator Considering Coordination With Synchronous 

Generator,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy , vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 1011 -1020, 

April 2022. 

[17] P. Kou, D. Liang, L. Yu, and L. Gao, ŌĆ£Nonlinear model predictive control 

of wind farm for system frequency support,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 

34, no. 5, pp. 3547 ŌĆō3561, Sep. 2019. 

[18] Z. Chu, U. Markovic, G. Hug, and F. Teng, ŌĆ£Towards optimal system 

scheduling with synthetic inertia provision from wind turbines,ŌĆØ IEEE 

Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4056 ŌĆō4066, Sep. 2020. 

[19] E. Riquelme, H. Chavez and K. A. Barbosa, ŌĆ£RoCoF -Minimizing HŌéé Norm 

Control Strategy for Multi -Wind Turbine Synthetic Inertia,ŌĆØ IEEE Access ,

vol. 10, pp. 1826 8-18278, 2022. 

[20] M. L. Chan, R. D. Dunlop, and F. Schweppe, ŌĆ£Dynamic equivalents for 

average system frequency behavior following major distribances,ŌĆØ IEEE 

Trans. Power App. Syst. , vol. 91, no. 4, pp. 1637 ŌĆō1642, Jul. 1972. 

[21] P. M. Anderson and M. Mirheydar, ŌĆ£A low -order system frequency 

response model,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 720 -729, Aug. 

1990 

[22] W. He, X. Yuan, and J. Hu, ŌĆ£Inertia provision and estimation of PLL -based 

DFIG wind turbines,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 510 ŌĆō521, 

Jan. 2017. 

[23] F. L. Lewis, D. Vrabie, and V. Syrmos, Optimal Control , 3rd ed. New York: 

Wiley, 2012. 

[24] D. A. Ben son, ŌĆ£A gauss pseudospectral transcription for optimal control,ŌĆØ 

Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Aeronaut. Astronaut., Mass. Inst. Technol., 

Cambridge, Nov. 2004. 

[25] A. D. Hansen, F. Lov, and P. S├Ė rensen, N. Cutululis, C. Jauch, F. Blaabjerg .

ŌĆ£Dynamic wind turbine models in power system simulation tool digsilent,ŌĆØ 

Ris├ĖNational Laboratory, Roskilde, Denmark, Aug. 2007. 

[26] P. Pourbeik, ŌĆ£Dynamic models for turbine -governors in power system 

studies,ŌĆØ IEEE PES Tech. Rep. PES -TR1 , 2013. 

[27] S. Azizi, M. Sun, G. Liu, and V. Terzija, ŌĆ£Local frequency -based 

estimation of the rate of change of frequency of the center of inertia,ŌĆØ IEEE 

Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 4948 ŌĆō4951, Nov. 2020 .

[28] P. T. Boggs and J. W. Tolle, ŌĆ£Sequential quadratic programming,ŌĆØ Acta 

numerica, vol. 4, pp. 1 ŌĆō51, 1995. 

Yu bo Zhang . (SŌĆÖ21 ) received the B.S. 

degree in electrical engineering from 

XiŌĆÖan Jiaotong University, China, in 2019. 

He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree 

in the school of Electrical Engineering in 

XiŌĆÖan Jiaotong University. His main field 

of interest includes the control for 

renewable energy, and power system 

frequency stability. 

Zhiguo Hao . (MŌĆÖ10 ) was born in Ordos, 

China, in 1976. He received his B.Sc. and 

Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering 

from Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 

China, in 1998 and 2007, respectively. He 

has been a Professor with the Electrical 

Engineering Department, Xi'an Jiaotong 

University. His research interest includes 

powe r system protection and control. 

So nghao Yang. (SŌĆÖ18 -MŌĆÖ19 ) was born in 

Shandong, China, in 1989. He received 

the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical 

engineering from the XiŌĆÖan Jiaotong 

University, XiŌĆÖan, China, in 2012 and 

2019, respectively. Besides, he received 

the Ph.D. degree in electr ical and 

electronic engineering from Tokushima 

University, Japan, in 2019. 

Currently, he is an A ssociate Professor 

at XiŌĆÖan Jiaotong University. His research interest includes 

powe r system control and protection. 

Baohui Zhang . (SMŌĆś99 -ŌĆÖFŌĆÖ19 ) was born 

in H ebei Province, China, in 1953. He 

received the M.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees in 

electrical engineering from XiŌĆÖan 

Jiaotong University, XiŌĆÖan, China, in 

1982 and 1988, respectively. He has been 

a Professor in the Electrical Engineering 

Department at XiŌĆÖan Jiaoto ng University 

since 1992. His research interests are system analysis, control, 

communication, and protection.