Title: Sequence-aware Large Language Models for Explainable Recommendation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.24136v1

Published Time: Thu, 26 Mar 2026 00:52:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
## Sequence-aware Large Language Models for Explainable Recommendation 

Gangyi Zhang 1,* Runzhe Teng 1,* Chongming Gao 1,†

> 1

University of Science and Technology of China 

gangyi.zhang@outlook.com, {trz177, chongminggao}@mail.ustc.edu.cn 

Abstract 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown strong potential in generating natural language explanations for recommender systems. How-ever, existing methods often overlook the se-quential dynamics of user behavior and rely on evaluation metrics misaligned with practi-cal utility. We propose SELLER (SE quence-aware LL M-based framework for Explainable 

Recommendation), which integrates expla-nation generation with utility-aware evalua-tion. SELLER combines a dual-path en-coder—capturing both user behavior and item semantics—with a Mixture-of-Experts adapter to align these signals with LLMs. A unified evaluation framework assesses explanations via both textual quality and their effect on recom-mendation outcomes. Experiments on public benchmarks show that SELLER consistently outperforms prior methods in explanation qual-ity and real-world utility. The dataset and code are available at https://github.com/ gangyizh/SELLER .

1 Introduction 

Recommender systems help users navigate over-whelming information in domains like e-commerce and social media. However, their opaque decision-making often undermines user trust. Explain-able Recommendation (ER) aims to improve trans-parency by providing human-interpretable justifi-cations for recommended items (Zhang and Chen, 2020; Vultureanu-Albisi and Bˇ adicˇ a, 2021). Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) have enabled more natural and informative explanations (Ma et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2024). Ex-isting LLM-based ER approaches can be broadly categorized into: (1) ID-based methods (Li et al., 2021), which prompt LLMs with user/item iden-tifiers; (2) Embedding-based methods (Li et al., 

> *Equal contribution.
> †Corresponding author.

2023), which integrate latent vectors into prompts; and (3) Hybrid methods (Ma et al., 2024), which combine collaborative signals and structured meta-data. Despite their effectiveness, these methods face two key limitations. First, they neglect the sequential nature of user behavior. Most models rely on static inputs and fail to capture the evolving preferences reflected in user trajectories. For instance, when a user shifts from “action” to “sci-fi thrillers”, current explanations often reflect item properties (Ma et al., 2024) rather than this preference transition, limiting personal-ization and user alignment. Second, current evaluation protocols are mis-aligned with real-world utility. Metrics like BLEU or BERTScore focus on surface-level similarity, but do not assess whether explanations help users make better decisions (He et al., 2023). Moreover, using review texts as ground truth (Sachdeva and McAuley, 2020) emphasizes item features rather than users’ actual decision rationale. To address these challenges, we propose 

SELLER , a SE quence-aware LL M-based frame-work for Explainable Recommendation. SELLER features (1) a dual-path encoder that models both collaborative and semantic user behavior, enhanced by a Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) adapter for dy-namic integration with the LLM; and (2) a unified evaluation framework that complements text-based metrics with utility-based measures derived from downstream recommendation performance. Experiments on public benchmarks demonstrate that SELLER achieves superior performance in both explanation quality and practical utility. Our main contributions are: 1. We propose a novel dual-path sequence encoder and MoE adapter that effectively model dy-namic user preferences for personalized expla-nation generation. 2. We propose a unified evaluation framework that jointly considers linguistic quality and recom-1

> arXiv:2603.24136v1 [cs.IR] 25 Mar 2026

mendation utility. 3. Empirical results validating SELLER’s advan-tages over prior methods in both explanation generation and decision support effectiveness. 

2 Preliminaries 

In this section, we formally define the core task ad-dressed by our framework and introduce our unified evaluation methodology. Unlike traditional meth-ods that focus solely on explanation generation, our approach aims to both generate high-quality sequence-aware explanations and provide a robust framework for assessing their practical utility. 

2.1 Notations and Definitions 

Let U = {u1, u 2, . . . , u N } denote the set of users and I = {i1, i 2, . . . , i M } the set of items. Each user u ∈ U is associated with a time-ordered inter-action sequence 

S(u) = [ i1, i 2, . . . , i t ], (1) where it corresponds to an item that u has inter-acted with at time step t (e.g., by clicking, purchas-ing, or rating). In addition, every item i ∈ I has a textual description di (e.g., product metadata or review snippets), providing explicit semantic cues to complement the implicit interaction signals. 

2.2 Task Definition: Sequence-Aware Explainable Recommendation 

The first task is to generate a natural language ex-planation E(u, i ) for a user–item pair (u, i ) in a post-hoc manner, which justifies why item i aligns with user u’s interests based on their sequential interaction history. Formally, 

E(u, i ) = f



S(u), {dj : j ∈ S(u)}, d i



, (2) where f (·) aims to encode both the temporal evolu-tion of user preferences and the semantic relation-ships among items. Unlike prior works that rely solely on IDs or static embeddings (Li et al., 2021, 2023; Ma et al., 2024), we emphasize modeling the sequential nature of user behavior to generate con-textually relevant and personalized explanations. 

2.3 Unified Evaluation Framework: Explanation Utility Assessment 

To address the limitations of text-similarity-based evaluation, we introduce a unified framework that assesses explanation quality through their practical utility in recommendation scenarios. We define an explanation-enhanced recommender that leverages generated explanations: 

ˆy(u, i | E(u, i )) = g



S(u), E (u, i )



, (3) where g(·) produces a relevance score for the pair 

(u, i ) conditioned on the explanation E(u, i ). This framework provides a task-based measure of ex-planation effectiveness: if E(u, i ) indeed captures the genuine rationale behind why i suits u, then leveraging E(u, i ) as an additional semantic signal should improve prediction accuracy. Importantly, this evaluation framework serves as a complement to traditional text metrics, not as a replacement for the primary explainable recommen-dation task. The framework enables us to assess whether explanations provide meaningful insights that could enhance user decision-making, offering a more comprehensive evaluation of explanation quality beyond linguistic similarity. 

3 Methodology 

Our proposed SELLER framework consists of two main components: (1) a Sequence-Aware Expla-nation Generator (SEG) that leverages user be-havioral sequences and item semantic sequences to generate personalized explanations, and (2) a uni-fied evaluation framework using an Explanation-Enhanced Recommender (EER) that assesses the practical utility of generated explanations. Figure 1 illustrates the overall architecture of SELLER. 

3.1 Sequence-Aware Explanation Generator 

The SEG aims to generate high-quality, personal-ized explanations that capture the evolution of user preferences through their interaction history. 

3.1.1 Dual-Path Sequence Encoding 

Given a user u and their interaction sequence 

Su = [ i1, i 2, . . . , i t], we propose a dual-path en-coding scheme that captures complementary se-quence information. Behavioral patterns reveal im-plicit user preferences through interaction histories, while semantic features extract explicit interest sig-nals from item descriptions. This complementarity is crucial as behavioral patterns may miss semantic relationships between items, while pure semantic analysis may overlook temporal dynamics. 

Behavioral Sequence Encoding. We employ a pre-trained SASRec (Kang and McAuley, 2018) 2Explanation     

> Category List
> LLM  Layer 1
> < Behavior  Seq  Emb . >  <Semantic Seq  Emb .>  Sampled Category  Texts … … ……
> Token Emb .
> <Behavior Seq Emb .>
> <Semantic Seq Emb .>
> Sampled Category Texts
> …
> …
> LLM Layer …
> LLM Layer N
> LLaMA2 -7b
> NN
> Layers 1
> Adapter

…                           

> Embedding Layer
> System Prompt: Analyze the user‘s behavioral data and item information to predict the top 3 most
> likely categories the user will interact with. For each category, provide one intent -related query .
> Input :
> •
> Behavioral Sequence Embedding :<Behavior Seq Emb .>
> •
> Semantic Sequence Embedding :<Semantic Seq Emb .>
> •
> Historical Category Sequence :[𝒄𝒂𝒕𝒆𝒈𝒐𝒓𝒚 𝟏 , category 2, …, category n]
> Output:
> •
> Category -Intent Pairs:
> •1. "Category 1", "Intent query related to category 1“
> •2. "Category 2", "Intent query related to category 2“
> •3. "Category 3", "Intent query related to category 3“
> ID
> Sequence
> Description
> Sequence
> Top k Item List
> Trainable Parameters
> Freezed Parameters
> ADD
> ADD
> Q
> Item 1  Item 2  Item N …
> Item 1 Item 2 Item N -1…
> (a) Sequence -Aware Explanation Generator (b) Explanation -Enhanced Recommender
> Attention Layer
> SASRec
> Item N
> Sentence -T5
> Sentence -T5
> SASRec
> Reshape
> Reshape
> K V
> NN
> Layers N
> Adapter
> MoE Sequence
> Adapter
> MoE Sequence
> Adapter
> Category List Extractor
> Hypernetworks
> Item Categories:
> 1. Shopping
> 2. Women ‘sClothes

Figure 1: Overall architecture of the SELLER framework. The Sequence-Aware Explanation Generator (SEG) captures user behavioral patterns through dual-path encoding and generates personalized explanations via MoE-based adaptation. The Explanation-Enhanced Recommender (EER) serves as our unified evaluation framework to assess explanation utility through downstream recommendation performance. 

model to encode the user’s behavioral sequence: 

Srec u = ϕrec (Su) ∈ Rd×| Su| (4) where ϕrec (·) denotes the SASRec encoder and d

is the embedding dimensionality. 

Semantic Sequence Encoding. We utilize Sentence-T5 (Ni et al., 2021) to encode the item descriptions corresponding to the user’s interaction sequence: 

Ssem u = ϕsem ([ di1 , d i2 , . . . , d it ]) ∈ Rd×| Su| (5) where dij represents the textual description of item 

ij , and ϕsem (·) is the Sentence-T5 encoder. 

3.1.2 MoE-based Sequence Adaptation 

To align the heterogeneous sequence representa-tions with the LLM’s semantic space, we introduce parallel MoE-based sequence adapters. For each representation path p ∈ { rec, sem }, the sequence embeddings are first processed by a Transformer encoder for temporal fusion: 

Hp = TransformerEncoder (LayerNorm (Spu)) .

(6) The sequence-level information is then obtained through mean pooling, followed by MoE-based adaptation: 

hp = MeanPool (Hp) (7) 

epadapt =

gX

i=1 

gi(hp) · Expert i(hp), (8) where gi(·) represents the gating networks deter-mining expert weights, and each expert is imple-mented as a two-layer feed-forward network. This process yields two adapted embeddings: erec adapt for behavioral patterns and esem adapt for semantic fea-tures. 

3.1.3 Sequence-Aware LLM Fine-tuning 

We enhance the LLM’s generation capability by incorporating the adapted sequence representations into both input construction and attention computa-tion. The input token sequence is structured as: 

XLLM = [ xLLM sys ; erec adapt ; esem adapt ; xLLM cat ] (9) where xLLM sys represents the fixed system prompt embedding, erec adapt and esem adapt are the MoE-adapted behavioral pattern and semantic feature embed-dings, respectively, and xLLM cat denotes the embed-dings of the sampled category texts from the item sequence. The inclusion of xLLM cat as an explicit text prompt provides richer context for the LLM without incurring significant computational over-head. The specific sampling method and examples are detailed in Appendix A.1. This design enables the model to dynamically ad-just its attention patterns based on both the current textual context and the user’s sequential behavior patterns. We inject sequence information directly into attention computation: 

Ql = Qbase l + erec adapt + esem adapt 

Kl = Kbase l + erec adapt + esem adapt 

Vl = Vbase l + erec adapt + esem adapt 

(10) 3The attention output is computed as: Attention l = Softmax 

 QlK⊤

> l

√d



Vl (11) 

Training Objective The SEG is optimized us-ing a language modeling objective while keep-ing the backbone LLM parameters frozen. Given a user’s complete interaction sequence Su =[i1, i 2, . . . , i N ] and the target item iN , the model learns to generate explanations in a post-hoc man-ner: 

Lexp = − X

> t

log P (yt|y<t , erec adapt , esem adapt ) (12) where yt represents the t-th token in the ground truth explanation, and the model has access to the complete sequence including the target item iN

during training. 

3.2 Explanation-Enhanced Recommender 

The EER serves as our unified evaluation frame-work to assess the practical utility of generated explanations through their impact on downstream recommendation performance. 

3.2.1 Explanation Encoding 

Given the generated explanation E(u, i ) for user u

and item i, we encode it into a dense representation using the Sentence-T5 encoder: 

eexplain = ϕsem (E(u, i )) (13) 

3.2.2 Hypernetwork-Generated Adapter 

To make SASRec explanation-aware, we employ a hypernetwork-based approach rather than sim-ple concatenation or addition of explanation em-beddings. While direct feature concatenation can introduce explanation information, it may fail to capture complex interactions between ex-planations and user preferences. Our hypernet-work generates adapter parameters for SASRec’s Transformer layers conditioned on the explana-tion embedding eexplain , enabling more flexible and expressive explanation-preference integration through dynamic parameter adaptation. For each Transformer layer l, the adaptive pa-rameters are computed as: 

W′ 

> l

= Wl + f hyper l (eexplain ) (14) where f hyper l is a layer-specific MLP. The gen-erated parameters are reshaped to match the di-mensions of the corresponding target parameters in SASRec’s Transformer layers parameters and added to them. 

3.2.3 Explanation-Aware SASRec Fine-tuning 

During the independent training phase, the EER is fine-tuned using a modified BPR loss that in-corporates both sequential information and ex-planation conditioning. Given a user sequence 

Su = [ i1, i 2, . . . , i N −1] and the target item iN , the loss is computed as: 

Lrec = − X log σ



ˆy(u, i N |Su, eGT explain )

− ˆy(u, i −|Su, eGT explain )

 (15) where i− is a randomly sampled negative item, 

eGT explain is the embedding of the ground truth ex-planation for item iN , and ˆy(u, i |Su, e explain ) rep-resents the predicted relevance score that incorpo-rates both the user’s sequential behavior Su and the explanation condition eexplain .

3.3 Training and Evaluation Protocol 

The SEG and EER are trained independently to ensure fair evaluation. During training, SEG learns to generate post-hoc explanations given complete user sequences Su = [ i1, . . . , i N ] including the target item, while EER learns next-item prediction using historical sequences Su = [ i1, . . . , i N −1] and ground truth explanation embeddings. During evaluation, we employ a post-hoc proto-col to assess explanation utility without informa-tion leakage: SEG generates explanations for test pairs (u, i N ) using complete sequences, while EER predicts the target item iN using only the histori-cal sequence Su = [ i1, . . . , i N −1] and the gener-ated explanation embedding. This setup measures whether explanations capture meaningful user-item relationships by evaluating their predictive utility in an information-constrained setting. All base-line methods undergo the same evaluation protocol using our unified EER framework, ensuring fair comparison. 

3.4 Ground Truth Explanation Generator 

The ground truth explanations used for training are constructed using Claude 3.5 Sonnet, following common practices in explainable recommendation research. We generate two types of explanations: 

Category-level Explanations provide coarse-grained justifications directly linked to item meta-data (e.g., the item belongs to “Restaurants”). 

Intent-level Explanations use an LLM to gen-erate plausible user intents within a category (e.g., 4for category “Restaurants”, a potential intent query might be “family-friendly dining options nearby”). This dual-level approach captures both explicit categorical preferences and implicit user intentions, providing richer training signals for the explana-tion generation model. The specific construction methodology and examples are detailed in Ap-pendix A.2. 

4 Experiments 

We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate SELLER’s effectiveness in both explanation gener-ation quality and explanation utility assessment. 

4.1 Experimental Settings Datasets. We evaluate the proposed SELLER framework on two widely-used datasets: Yelp 1

and KuaiRec 2 (Gao et al., 2022). Yelp provides a rich collection of user interactions with businesses, while Kuairec offers a fully-observed user-item in-teraction matrix for short-form video recommenda-tions. For both datasets, we apply 10-core filtering to retain interactions where both users and items have more than 10 interactions. Table 1 summa-rizes the key statistics of the filtered datasets.             

> Table 1: Dataset statistics.
> Dataset #Users #Items #Interactions #Categories
> Yelp 25,633 89,994 396,805 1253 Kuairec 6,584 8,180 342,700 446

Data Splitting. We split the user interaction se-quences chronologically into training, validation, and testing sets with a ratio of 8:1:1. The split is performed at a specific point in time to ensure a re-alistic evaluation setup and prevent future informa-tion leakage (Sun, 2023). The maximum sequence length is set to 50 for all experiments. 

Evaluation Metrics. We evaluate SELLER from two complementary perspectives: 1. Explanation Generation Quality : We em-ploy BLEU (Sellam et al., 2020) to measure lexical overlap and BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2020) to assess semantic similarity between generated and reference explanations. 2. Explanation Utility Assessment We use our unified evaluation framework (Section 3.2) 

> 1https://www.yelp.com/dataset/
> 2https://kuairec.com/

to measure how effectively explanations help the EER predict target items. We report Re-call@K and Normalized Discounted Cumu-lative Gain (NDCG@K), with K set to 5 and 10, to assess explanation utility through rec-ommendation performance improvement. 

Baselines. We compare SELLER against state-of-the-art explainable recommendation methods, including: • PETER (Li et al., 2021): A post-hoc explana-tion generation approach that fine-tunes pre-trained language models using user and item IDs as input. • PEPLER (Li et al., 2023): An explainable recommendation framework that incorporates user and item embeddings into pre-trained lan-guage models for explanation generation. • XRec (Ma et al., 2024): A method that lever-ages both latent representations and explicit features to generate explanations using large language models. Additionally, we include two control baselines: • Random : Uses randomly sampled explana-tions from the training set. • Empty : Uses empty string explanations to isolate the effect of the adapter mechanism. 

Implementation Details. We initialize the item embeddings with 64-dimensional vectors from SASRec, which consists of 2 Transformer lay-ers. The Sentence-T5 encoder produces 768-dimensional representations. In the MoE-based sequence adaptation module, we employ a two-layer Transformer encoder with 64-dimensional embeddings, 4 attention heads. The MoE module comprises 8 experts , each implemented as a two-layer feedforward network with a dropout rate of 0.2. We adopt LLaMA2-7B (Touvron et al., 2023) as the language language model for explanation generation. The Sequence-Aware Explanation Gen-erator (SEG) is trained for 5 epochs using the Adam optimizer with a batch size of 8, a learning rate of 1e-4, and a weight decay of 1e-6. The Explanation-Enhanced Recommender (EER) is trained for 50 epochs using the Adam optimizer with a batch size of 256, a learning rate of 5e-4, and a weight decay of 1e-5. 5Table 2: Performance comparison of explanation utility assessment using the Explanation-Enhanced Recommender. The best results are highlighted in bold , and the second-best are underlined . R@K and N@K denote Recall@K and NDCG@K, respectively.                                                                  

> Method Yelp Kuairec Recall@5 Recall@10 NDCG@5 NDCG@10 Recall@5 Recall@10 NDCG@5 NDCG@10 Random 0.0088 0.0156 0.0053 0.0075 0.1260 0.1960 0.0789 0.1015
> Empty 0.0072 0.0136 0.0046 0.0067 0.1272 0.1956 0.0795 0.1016
> PETER 0.0116 0.0144 0.0067 0.0076 0.1168 0.1832 0.0719 0.0935
> PEPLER 0.0100 0.0172 0.0062 0.0085 0.1252 0.1936 0.0814 0.1036
> XRec 0.0116 0.0192 0.0067 0.0091 0.1280 0.1972 0.0817 0.1042
> SELLER 0.0144 0.0228 0.0089 0.0116 0.1344 0.2132 0.0854 0.1110 Improve 24.14% 18.75% 33.40% 27.52% 5.00% 8.11% 4.54% 6.57%

4.2 Results and Analysis Explanation Utility Assessment. Table 2presents the utility assessment of explanations generated by different ER methods within our unified evaluation framework. • SELLER achieves superior explanation utility across both datasets. Compared with XRec, SELLER obtains 18.75% and 8.11% improve-ments in Recall@10, and 27.52% and 6.57% improvements in NDCG@10 on Yelp and KuaiRec, respectively. This demonstrates that SELLER’s sequence-aware explanations pro-vide more useful semantic signals for the rec-ommendation task. • The significant relative improvements ob-served between SELLER and baseline meth-ods within this consistent evaluation frame-work demonstrate the superior quality and practical relevance of explanations generated by our sequence-aware approach. While ab-solute metrics reflect the specific evaluation setup, the comparative gains robustly indicate explanation quality differences. • Baseline performance variations across datasets reveal important insights. On Yelp, all ER methods outperform “Random” and “Empty” baselines, validating the utility of personalized explanations. However, on KuaiRec, PEPLER and PETER underperform, suggesting that dense interaction sequences require more sophisticated explanation generation models. 

Explanation Generation Quality. Table 3 eval-uates explanation quality using traditional text sim-

Table 3: Explanation quality comparison.                          

> Method Yelp Kuairec BLEU BERTScore BLEU BERTScore PETER 0.1242 0.6088 0.1121 0.5184
> PEPLER 0.2632 0.7063 0.1123 0.5770
> XRec 0.3243 0.7328 0.1536 0.6265
> SELLER 0.3815 0.7524 0.2072 0.7011 Improve 17.64% 2.67% 34.90% 11.91%

ilarity metrics, providing an intrinsic assessment complementary to the utility-based evaluation. • SELLER generates explanations with the highest lexical and semantic similarity to the groundtruth on both datasets. SELLER ob-tains larger improvements on the Kuairec dataset, which contains dense interaction se-quences. This verifies the superiority of SELLER in capturing sequential information for explanation generation. • Interestingly, while SELLER obtains larger gains on Kuairec in terms of text similarity, its improvements in recommendation perfor-mance are more significant on Yelp. This implies that higher textual similarity to the groundtruth explanations does not necessar-ily indicate better reflection of users’ real decision-making process. The groundtruth ex-planations themselves may contain noise and bias. Therefore, evaluating explanation qual-ity solely based on text similarity can be unre-liable, further emphasizing the importance of the integrated evaluation approach adopted by SELLER. 

Combined Analysis. The complementary nature of Tables 2 and 3 provides a comprehensive view of explanation quality. While Table 3 measures lin-guistic fidelity, Table 2 assesses practical utility, to-6gether offering a more complete evaluation than ei-ther metric alone. SELLER’s consistent superiority across both evaluations validates its effectiveness in sequence-aware explainable recommendation. 

4.3 Ablation Study Recall@10 NDCG@10 0.005        

> 0.011
> 0.017
> 0.023
> 0.029
> (a)
> Yelp
> Recall@10 NDCG@10 0.080
> 0.115
> 0.150
> 0.185
> 0.220
> (b)
> Kuairec
> BLEU BERTScore 0.100
> 0.281
> 0.462
> 0.643
> 0.824
> (c)
> Yelp
> BLEU BERTScore 0.000
> 0.191
> 0.382
> 0.573
> 0.764
> (d)
> KuaiRec
> Ours w/o BE w/o SE w/o CT w/o DE

Figure 2: Ablation study on the sequence-aware com-ponents of SELLER. BE: MoE-adapted behavioral em-bedding, SE: MoE-adapted semantic embedding, CT: category texts, DE: BE+SE. 

Impact of Sequence-Aware Components. To validate the effectiveness of our sequence-aware design, we conduct ablation studies by removing key components: • w/o BE : SELLER without MoE-adapted be-havioral embedding ( erec adapt )• w/o SE : SELLER without MoE-adapted se-mantic embedding ( esem adapt )• w/o CT : SELLER without category texts (xLLM cat )• w/o DE : SELLER without both behavioral and semantic embeddings As shown in Figure 2, removing any component leads to performance degradation, with the follow-ing key observations: • The significant drop in w/o DE validates our motivation to capture both implicit behavioral patterns and explicit semantic features for ex-planation generation. • On Yelp, w/o SE causes larger performance drops than w/o BE , suggesting that seman-tic features from detailed reviews provide stronger signals for explanation generation in the Yelp domain. • On Kuairec, w/o BE and w/o SE show compa-rable impact, indicating that both behavioral and semantic sequences contribute similarly to short video recommendations where user interactions are more frequent and diverse. 

Table 4: Performance comparison with different expla-nation inputs for the recommendation model.                  

> Method Yelp Kuairec Recall@10 NDCG@10 Recall@10 NDCG@10 Random Category 0.0156 0.0075 0.1760 0.1015
> Category-level 0.0188 0.0096 0.1748 0.0920
> Intent-level 0.0192 0.0093 0.1892 0.0984
> Both (SELLER) 0.0228 0.0116 0.2132 0.1110

Effect of Explanation Types. To evaluate our hypernetwork-based explanation injection mecha-nism, we compare different types of explanatory inputs for recommendation (Table 4): • All explanation variants outperform the ran-dom text baseline, validating the effectiveness of our hypernetwork-based adapter in utilizing explanatory signals for recommendation. • Intent-level explanations achieve better perfor-mance than category-level ones, suggesting that fine-grained semantic information pro-vides stronger guidance for recommendation. • The superior performance of combining both explanation types demonstrates our model’s capability to effectively integrate complemen-tary semantic signals through the hypernet-work mechanism. 

Efficiency Analysis. We compare the training and inference efficiency of SELLER with base-lines. As shown in Table 5, SELLER has a much lower training and inference cost compared with XRec, while slightly higher than LLaMA2. This is because SELLER does not incorporate additional user or item profile texts, leading to shorter input and lower computational cost. The results demon-strate the efficiency of SELLER in both training and inference. 

5 Related Work 

In this section, we review relevant literature on ex-plainable recommendation systems and parameter-efficient fine-tuning, highlighting the gaps our work addresses. 7Method Training Time Inference Time       

> XRec 1×1×
> SELLER 0.735 ×0.448 ×
> LLaMA2-7B —0.328 ×
> Table 5: Comparison of training and inference efficiency. The training time and inference time are relative to XRec.

5.1 Explainable Recommendation Systems 

Early approaches to explainable recommendation focused on extracting explanations from user re-views (Zhang et al., 2014) or mining patterns from user-item interactions (Liu et al., 2023) and knowl-edge graphs (Zhu et al., 2021). Template-based methods (Zhang et al., 2018; Lei et al., 2020) gen-erated explanations by filling predefined templates with relevant features, while attention-based ap-proaches (Cong et al., 2019) leveraged attention mechanisms to highlight important factors influ-encing recommendations. However, these methods struggle with scalability and require extensive do-main knowledge. The emergence of large language models has opened new possibilities for generating more natu-ral and contextually relevant explanations. PETER (Li et al., 2021) pioneered the use of pre-trained language models for explanation generation by in-corporating user and item IDs into the input prompt. PEPLER (Li et al., 2023) extended this approach by injecting learned user and item embeddings into the LLM architecture. XRec (Ma et al., 2024) fur-ther enhanced explanation quality by combining both latent collaborative filtering signals and ex-plicit features. While these LLM-based methods have significantly improved explanation quality, they primarily focus on static representations and treat explanation generation as a standalone task. Our work differs by explicitly modeling sequential patterns and proposing a unified framework that evaluates explanations based on their impact on recommendation performance. 

5.2 Parameter-Efficient Fine-tuning and Adaptation 

Parameter-efficient fine-tuning has emerged as a crucial technique for adapting large pre-trained models. Adapter modules (Houlsby et al., 2019) and LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) demonstrate the effec-tiveness of introducing small trainable components while keeping base models frozen. In recommenda-tion systems, these methods have been applied to inject collaborative filtering signals into LLMs (Ma et al., 2024). However, existing approaches typi-cally focus on aligning static embeddings, neglect-ing the sequential nature of user behaviors. The Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architecture (Mustafa et al., 2022) has shown success in conditional com-putation and dynamic feature fusion. Hypernet-works (Lv et al., 2024) offer flexible parameter generation conditioned on input features, enabling efficient cross-task adaptation. While these tech-niques have been explored for LLM adaptation, their potential for sequence-aware explainable rec-ommendation remains unexplored. 

6 Conclusion 

In this work, we propose SELLER, a novel frame-work for sequence-aware explainable recommenda-tion that addresses two fundamental limitations of existing approaches: the neglect of temporal user behavior patterns and the lack of robust evalua-tion methodologies. Our contributions are twofold. First, we introduce a Sequence-Aware Explanation Generator that captures dynamic user preferences through dual-path encoding and MoE-based adap-tation, enabling personalized explanations that re-flect sequential interaction patterns. Second, we propose a unified evaluation framework that as-sesses explanation quality through their practical utility in recommendation tasks, complementing traditional text similarity metrics. Experiments on two public datasets demonstrate SELLER’s ef-fectiveness, achieving significant improvements in both explanation quality over state-of-the-art meth-ods, while maintaining superior computational ef-ficiency. These results highlight the importance of capturing sequential patterns in explainable rec-ommendation and offer a principled approach to assess explanation utility beyond textual metrics, ultimately moving toward more transparent recom-mender systems that provide users with meaningful insights into their decision-making processes. 

Limitations 

Despite SELLER’s advances, several limitations warrant future investigation. 

Ground Truth Construction Our approach re-lies on LLM-generated ground truth explanations, which may not fully capture users’ genuine sequen-tial intents. This item-side inference introduces potential biases compared to directly elicited user rationales. Future work should explore methods 8for obtaining more authentic ground truth explana-tions or developing approaches less dependent on labeled references. 

Evaluation Constraints The current evaluation relies exclusively on offline metrics, which may not fully align with real-world user perceptions. Incorporating online user studies would provide deeper insights into how sequence-aware explana-tions impact user satisfaction and trust in practical scenarios. 

Modality and Domain Coverage SELLER pri-marily integrates textual and sequential behavioral signals, leaving multimodal explanations unex-plored. Additionally, while evaluated on business and video recommendations, its effectiveness in other domains requires further validation. Future research should explore cross-modal and cross-domain adaptations to enhance the framework’s generalizability. 

References 

Dawei Cong, Yanyan Zhao, Bing Qin, Yu Han, Murray Zhang, Alden Liu, and Nat Chen. 2019. Hierarchical attention based neural network for explainable rec-ommendation. In Proceedings of the 2019 on Inter-national Conference on Multimedia Retrieval , ICMR ’19, page 373–381, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Chongming Gao, Shijun Li, Wenqiang Lei, Jiawei Chen, Biao Li, Peng Jiang, Xiangnan He, Jiaxin Mao, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2022. Kuairec: A fully-observed dataset and insights for evaluating recommender sys-tems. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Manage-ment , CIKM ’22, page 540–550, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Tianxing He, Jingyu Zhang, Tianle Wang, Sachin Kumar, Kyunghyun Cho, James Glass, and Yulia Tsvetkov. 2023. On the blind spots of model-based evaluation metrics for text generation. In Proceed-ings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 12067–12097, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin De Laroussilhe, Andrea Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly. 2019. Parameter-efficient transfer learning for NLP. In 

Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 2790–2799. PMLR. J. Edward Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2021. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. ArXiv , abs/2106.09685. Wang-Cheng Kang and Julian McAuley. 2018. Self-attentive sequential recommendation. Preprint ,arXiv:1808.09781. Wenqiang Lei, Gangyi Zhang, Xiangnan He, Yisong Miao, Xiang Wang, Liang Chen, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2020. Interactive path reasoning on graph for conver-sational recommendation. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowl-edge Discovery & Data Mining , KDD ’20, page 2073–2083. Lei Li, Yongfeng Zhang, and Li Chen. 2021. Person-alized transformer for explainable recommendation. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-guage Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 4947–4957, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Lei Li, Yongfeng Zhang, and Li Chen. 2023. Person-alized prompt learning for explainable recommenda-tion. Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS) ,41(4):1–26. Jiahao Liu, Dongsheng Li, Hansu Gu, Tun Lu, Peng Zhang, Li Shang, and Ning Gu. 2023. Triple struc-tural information modelling for accurate, explainable and interactive recommendation. In Proceedings of the 46th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval ,SIGIR ’23, page 1086–1095, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Yucong Luo, Mingyue Cheng, Hao Zhang, Junyu Lu, and Enhong Chen. 2024. Unlocking the potential of large language models for explainable recommenda-tions. In Database Systems for Advanced Applica-tions: 29th International Conference, DASFAA 2024, Gifu, Japan, July 2–5, 2024, Proceedings, Part V ,page 286–303, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer-Verlag. Chuancheng Lv, Lei Li, Shitou Zhang, Gang Chen, Fan-chao Qi, Ningyu Zhang, and Hai-Tao Zheng. 2024. HyperLoRA: Efficient cross-task generalization via constrained low-rank adapters generation. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 16376–16393, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Qiyao Ma, Xubin Ren, and Chao Huang. 2024. Xrec: Large language models for explainable recommenda-tion. Preprint , arXiv:2406.02377. Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Efficient estimation of word representa-tions in vector space. Preprint , arXiv:1301.3781. 

9Basil Mustafa, Carlos Riquelme, Joan Puigcerver, Rodolphe Jenatton, and Neil Houlsby. 2022. Mul-timodal contrastive learning with limoe: the language-image mixture of experts. Preprint ,arXiv:2206.02770. Jianmo Ni, Gustavo Hernández Ábrego, Noah Con-stant, Ji Ma, Keith B. Hall, Daniel Cer, and Yin-fei Yang. 2021. Sentence-t5: Scalable sentence en-coders from pre-trained text-to-text models. Preprint ,arXiv:2108.08877. Noveen Sachdeva and Julian McAuley. 2020. How useful are reviews for recommendation? a critical review and potential improvements. In Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval ,SIGIR ’20, page 1845–1848, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Thibault Sellam, Dipanjan Das, and Ankur P Parikh. 2020. Bleurt: Learning robust metrics for text gener-ation. In ACL .Aixin Sun. 2023. On challenges of evaluating recom-mender systems in an offline setting. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Recommender Sys-tems , RecSys ’23, page 1284–1285, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin R. Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Daniel M. Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cris-tian Cantón Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony S. Hartshorn, Saghar Hos-seini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel M. Kloumann, A. V. Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee, Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, R. Subramanian, Xia Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zhengxu Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, An-gela Fan, Melissa Hall Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurélien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. ArXiv ,abs/2307.09288. Alexandra Vultureanu-Albisi and C. B ˇadic ˇa. 2021. Rec-ommender systems: An explainable ai perspective. 

2021 International Conference on INnovations in In-telligent SysTems and Applications (INISTA) , pages 1–6. Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q Wein-berger, and Yoav Artzi. 2020. Bertscore: Evaluating text generation with bert. In ICLR .Yongfeng Zhang and Xu Chen. 2020. Explainable recommendation: A survey and new perspectives. 

Found. Trends Inf. Retr. , 14(1):1–101. Yongfeng Zhang, Xu Chen, Qingyao Ai, Liu Yang, and W. Bruce Croft. 2018. Towards conversational search and recommendation: System ask, user respond. In 

Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Confer-ence on Information and Knowledge Management ,CIKM ’18, page 177–186, New York, NY, USA. As-sociation for Computing Machinery. Yongfeng Zhang, Guokun Lai, Min Zhang, Yi Zhang, Yiqun Liu, and Shaoping Ma. 2014. Explicit factor models for explainable recommendation based on phrase-level sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 37th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research & Development in Information Retrieval ,SIGIR ’14, page 83–92, New York, NY, USA. Asso-ciation for Computing Machinery. Yaxin Zhu, Yikun Xian, Zuohui Fu, Gerard de Melo, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2021. Faithfully explainable recommendation via neural logic reasoning. In Pro-ceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North Amer-ican Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 3083–3090, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

10 A Appendix 

In this appendix, we provide additional details on: (A) data preprocessing for the SELLER framework, (B) construction of ground truth explanations, and (C) a comprehensive case study demonstrating the effectiveness of our sequence-aware explainable recommendation approach. 

A.1 Data Preprocessing for Sequence-Aware LLM Input 

The effectiveness of our Dual-Path Sequence En-coding module relies on properly structured input data for the Language Model (LLM). We detail the preprocessing steps that transform raw interaction data into semantically rich representations. 

A.1.1 Item Description Construction 

For each item in a user’s interaction sequence, we construct structured textual descriptions as follows: 

Yelp Dataset. We extract and combine key meta-data fields including: name, address, city, state, star rating, star range, business attributes, categories, operating hours, and open status. Figure 3 illus-trates this filtering process, where non-essential fields (e.g., postal code, latitude, longitude) are re-moved, while preserving information that captures geographical, categorical, and temporal relevance. 

KuaiRec Dataset. Due to limited metadata in this short-form video recommendation dataset, we primarily use the category field as the item’s textual description to maintain consistency across datasets. 

A.1.2 Category Sequence Construction 

To capture high-level semantic patterns in user be-havior, we construct category sequences as follows: 1. Extract up to three categories per item from the item’s category list 2. Apply a word2vec-inspired downsampling strategy (Mikolov et al., 2013) to balance cat-egory distribution while preserving diversity The downsampling probability is calculated as: 

Pextsampled =



1 −

 t

freq 

0.5

, if freq > t 

1.0, otherwise where t is a threshold parameter (set to 1 × 10 −5

in our experiments) and f req is the normalized frequency of the category in the dataset. This Yelp Raw Meta Info                                                              

> "mpf3x -BjTdTEA3yCZrAYPw" :{
> "name" :"The UPS Store" ,
> "address" :"87 Grasso Plaza Shopping Center" ,
> "city" :"Affton" ,
> "state" :"MO" ,
> "postal_code ":"63123" ,
> "latitude" :38.551126 ,
> "longitude" :-90.335695 ,
> "stars" :3.0 ,
> "review_count ":15 ,
> "is_open ":1,
> "attributes" :{
> "BusinessAcceptsCreditCards ":true
> },
> "categories" :[
> "Shipping Centers" ,"Local Services" ,"Notaries ",
> "Mailbox Centers" ,"Printing Services"
> ],
> "hours" :{
> "Monday" :"0:0 -0:0" ,
> "Tuesday" :"8:0 -18:30" ,
> "Wednesday" :"8:0 -18:30" ,
> "Thursday" :"8:0 -18:30" ,
> "Friday" :"8:0 -18:30" ,
> "Saturday" :"8:0 -14:0"
> },
> "stars_range ":"2.5 -3.5" ,
> "review_count_range ":0
> }
> "mpf3x -BjTdTEA3yCZrAYPw" :{
> "name" :"The UPS Store" ,
> "address" :"87 Grasso Plaza Shopping Center" ,
> "city" :"Affton" ,
> "state" :"MO" ,
> "stars" :3.0 ,
> "stars_range ":"2.5 -3.5" ,
> "attributes" :{
> "BusinessAcceptsCreditCards ":true
> },
> "categories" :[
> "Shipping Centers" ,"Local Services" ,"Notaries ",
> "Mailbox Centers" ,"Printing Services"
> ],
> "hours" :{
> "Monday" :"0:0 -0:0" ,
> "Tuesday" :"8:0 -18:30" ,
> "Wednesday" :"8:0 -18:30" ,
> "Thursday" :"8:0 -18:30" ,
> "Friday" :"8:0 -18:30" ,
> "Saturday" :"8:0 -14:0”
> },
> "is_open ":1,
> }

Yelp Filtered Description 

Figure 3: Structured meta-information filtering process for the Yelp dataset. The raw metadata is filtered to retain relevant fields that capture business characteristics while removing non-essential information. 

approach helps balance frequently occurring cate-gories (e.g., "Restaurants" in Yelp) with more spe-cific ones, leading to more diverse and informative category sequences. 

A.1.3 LLM Input Structure 

For the Sequence-Aware Explanation Generator, we format the input prompt structure as shown in Figure 4. This system prompt guides the LLM to analyze user behavioral patterns based on the sequence representations and generate category-intent pairs that capture both explicit categories 11 System Prompt: Analyze the user‘s behavioral data and item information to predict the top 3 most            

> likely categories the user will interact with. For each category, provide one intent -related query .
> Input :
> •
> Behavioral Sequence Embedding :[0.235, -0.189, 0.412, ...]
> •
> Semantic Sequence Embedding :[0.142, 0.367, -0.214, ...]
> •
> Historical Category Sequence :
> ["Distilleries", "Nightlife", "Wine & Spirits", "Arts & Entertainment", "Music Venues“ …]
> Category -Level
> Output: Explanation –Item N :
> 1. “Shopping”, “Top rated shopping centers near me”
> 2. “Women's Clothing”, “Trendy women's clothing brands ”
> Intent -Level
> Sampled from Item -1Sampled from Item -2
> Item N

Figure 4: Input structure for the Sequence-Aware Ex-planation Generator, including the system prompt, input fields, and expected output format with examples. 

and underlying user intentions. 

A.2 Ground Truth Explanation Construction 

To train our Sequence-Aware Explanation Genera-tor, we need high-quality ground truth explanations. Following recent work in LLM-based recommen-dations (Ma et al., 2024), we leverage Claude 3.5 Sonnet to generate two types of ground truth expla-nations: 1. Category-level explanations : Coarse-grained justifications directly linked to item metadata 2. Intent-level explanations : Fine-grained ra-tionales capturing potential user intentions 

A.2.1 Prompt Design for Ground Truth Generation 

Figure 5 illustrates our approach for generat-ing ground truth explanations using the KuaiRec dataset. We carefully design the LLM prompt to elicit both explicit category-based explanations and implicit intent-based explanations. In this design: • Explicit queries directly mention the cate-gory (e.g., "Remixes and mashups of popular songs" for "Secondary Creation Music") • Implicit queries describe user needs without explicitly naming the category (e.g., "Capti-vating new interpretations of familiar tunes") This dual-query approach enhances the model’s ability to infer intent beyond direct keyword match-ing, accommodating both straightforward and nu-anced user preferences. The generated expla-nations serve as valuable training data for the SELLER framework, enabling it to produce high-quality, contextually relevant explanations for rec-ommended items. Task Title: Build User Query Templates Based on the Kuairec Dataset 

Background: On the Kuairec short video platform, users often search for 

specific types of video content to meet their entertainment or learning needs. 

Videos on the platform are categorized into different types, such as funny, 

photography, beauty, etc. To better understand users' search intentions, we 

can create user query templates based on the video categories available on 

Kuairec . These templates will include both explicit and implicit queries: 

explicit queries directly mention the category, while implicit queries involve 

related needs without directly mentioning the category. 

Core Task: Given a specific video category, which includes a series of 

related subcateg -ories , construct a JSON -formatted template that contains 

examples of both explicit and imp -licit user queries for each subcategory. 

System Instruction 

Output Format: 

{

"category_value ": { 

"Explicit": [ 

"Query example 1", 

"Query example 2", 

... 

], 

"Implicit": [ 

"Query example 1", 

"Query example 2", 

... 

]

}

}

Analyze the given subcategory: 

['Secondary Creation Music', 'Pets', 'Street Singing', 'Talent', 'DIY Music', 

'Parrots', 'Reptiles and Insects', 'Fish', 'Rabbits', 'Lip Sync', 'Wildlife', 'Field 

Singing', 'Pet Rats', 'Snakes', 'Anim -als ', 'Monkeys', 'Non -pet Snakes', 'Cats', 

'Sisters Who Make Waves', 'Traditional Opera', 'Pigeons’], and create 

relevant queries based on the actual user needs on the platform. 

Input Prompt 

Generated Queries 

{

"Secondary Creation Music": { 

"Explicit": [ 

"Remixes and mashups of popular songs", 

"Creative music covers and reimaginations", 

"Innovative secondary music productions", 

"Collaborative music creation projects" 

], 

"Implicit": [ 

"Captivating new interpretations of familiar tunes", 

"Appreciating the artistry and ingenuity of music remixers", 

"Exploring the boundaries of musical expression and 

collaboration", 

"Immersed in the dynamic and evolving world of music 

recomposition "

]

}, ... 

}

Figure 5: Ground truth explanation generation process for the KuaiRec dataset, showing the task specification, prompt design, and sample output format. 

A.3 Case Study 

To illustrate the effectiveness of the SELLER framework for sequence-aware explainable rec-ommendation, we present a detailed case study in Figure 6. This example demonstrates how our approach generates high-quality explanations that capture temporal patterns in user preferences through the Sequence-Aware Explanation Genera-tor (SEG), and how these explanations are evalu-ated through our proposed Explanation-Enhanced Recommender (EER). In this example: 12 History Interacted Item List             

> ['Hotel Tango', 'Union 50’, ' HopCat -St Louis', 'The Inferno Room’, 'Bakersfield ', 'Virginia Avenue pizza’,
> "Workingman's Friend", 'Forty Five Degrees’, 'Plat 99', 'Indy Cycle Specialist', 'La Parada’,
> "Iaria's Italian Restaurant", 'Tlaolli ’]
> 1. " Bars , Bars catering to a wide range of tastes ",
> 2. " Restaurants , Family -friendly dining options in my area ",
> 3. " American (Traditional) , Places that offer a taste of authentic, down -to -earth American fa re "

Task One – LLM Output Explanation 

> Downtown Olly's

GroundTruth Item    

> ['American (Traditional)’, 'Breakfast & Brunch’,
> 'Restaurants’, 'Gay Bars’, 'Nightlife’ ,'Bars' ]

GroundTruth Item -Categories List 

Task Two – Top 5 Item List            

> ['Rosemary & Beauty Queen’,
> 'Push Ultra Lounge’,
> 'Spotlight Restaurant & Bar’,
> ‘Downtown Olly’s’,
> ‘Brother Paul’s’]
> ['Hill Street Grill’,
> 'Off the Hook Beach Bistro’,
> 'Belle Meade Plantation Events & Wedding’
> 'Smashburger’,
> ‘St . Pete Tattoo Company’]

w/o HGA Rec Item List 

Data 

Processor           

> [['Distilleries', ' Nightlife ','Wine &Spirits’],
> ['Arts & Entertainment', 'Music Venues', 'American (New )'],
> ['Nightlife', 'Venues & Event Spaces', Planning &Services’],
> ['Mexican ', 'Cocktail Bars', 'Tacos’],
> …
> ['Vegetarian', 'Restaurants', 'Mexican’]]

Sampled Category Texts 

Behavior Seq Emb .

Semantic Seq Emb .

Sequence -Aware Explanation Generator 

Explanation -Enhanced Recommender 

SASRec Figure 6: A comprehensive case study demonstrating SELLER’s explanation generation capabilities. The framework leverages sequence information to generate contextually relevant explanations that capture the user’s evolving preferences. The evaluation through our EER framework shows that these explanations successfully reflect meaningful user-item relationships. 

1. The user has interacted with various bars and restaurants in the past, as shown in the "His-tory Interacted Item List" 2. The Sequence-Aware Explanation Generator processes both behavioral and semantic se-quence embeddings, along with sampled cate-gory texts 3. The generator produces three key explanations that reflect the user’s evolving preferences: "Bars catering to a wide range of tastes", "Family-friendly dining options in my area", and "Places that offer authentic, down-to-earth American fare" 4. These explanations successfully capture the categories present in the target item "Down-town Olly’s" (American Traditional, Restau-rants, Bars) 5. Our Explanation-Enhanced Recommender, as part of the evaluation framework, confirms the utility of these explanations by successfully ranking the target item in the top recommen-dations This case study highlights two key aspects of our framework. First, it demonstrates that SELLER can generate explanations that effectively capture the sequential evolution of user preferences, something that standard static approaches would miss. The ex-planations reflect not just general user preferences but the specific trajectory of interests over time. Second, it validates our unified evaluation ap-proach. The fact that our explanation-enhanced recommender can successfully identify the target item suggests that the generated explanations con-tain meaningful information about the user-item relationship. This supports our argument that expla-nation quality should be evaluated not just through text similarity metrics but through their practical utility in capturing genuine recommendation ratio-nales. 13