Title: 2604.22933v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.22933v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Apr 2026 00:07:00 GMT

Number of Pages: 98

Markdown Content:
Machine Learning Forecast s of Asymmetric Betas 

# Using Firm -Specific Information 

Thomas Conlon 1, John Cotter 2, and Iason Kynigakis 3

Current Version: April 20, 202 6

## Abstract 

We demonstrate that machine learning methods provide a powerful framework for modelling 

conditional asymmetric risk. Using a large cross -section of US stocks and a comprehensive set of firm 

characteristics, we show that allowing for nonlinearities significantly increases the out -of -sample 

performance across a wide range of asymmetric beta measures and forecasting horizons. Trading 

frictions , followed by characteristics related to intangibles, momentum and growth, emerge as the most 

important drivers of future risk dynamics. Reconstructing CAPM beta from forecasts of asymmetric 

beta components indicates that a more granular decomposition of systematic risk yields a more accurate 

representation of market beta . We also find that incorporating conditional beta forecasts into discounted 

cash flow models that account for the term structure of betas enhances equity valuation accuracy. 

Finally, we show that the statistical outperformance of conditional betas translate s into economically 

significant benefits for market -neutral portfolio investors. 

JEL classifications : C52 , C55, C58, G11, G12, G17 , G31 .

Keywords : Asymmetric risk, conditional beta, equity valuation , machine learning , portfolio 

management . 

> 

The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of Science Foundation Ireland under Grants Numbers 

16/SPP/3347, 13/RC/2106 P2, 17/SPP/5447, 18/CRT/6224 and of the Irish Research Council under grant number 

GOIPD/2022/721. We also thank Ben Charoenwong and Marcel Prokopczuk for helpful comments and 

suggestions.  

> 1

Michael Smurfit Graduate Business School, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland , conlon.thomas@ucd.ie  

> 2

Michael Smurfit Graduate Business School, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland , john.cotter@ucd.ie  

> 3

Michael Smurfit Graduate Business School, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland , iason.kynigakis@ucd.ie 1

## 1. Introduction 

Beta from the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) of Sharpe (1964), Lintner (1965), and Mossin 

(1966) is one of the most important measures in asset pricing and i s widely used for capital budgeting 

and asset allocation decisions. However, there exists extensive literature that finds regular market betas 

perform poorly in the context for which they were developed, such as for explaining the cross -sectional 

variation of stock returns (see, e.g., Fama and French, 1992, 2008; Lewellen and Nagel, 2006; Lewellen, 

2015). Early studies by Roy (1952) and Markowitz (1959) suggest that investors perceive risk 

differently during periods of low and high market returns. In addition, Campbell et al. (2001), indicate 

that firm -specific betas are difficult to estimate and are unstab le over time. As corporate managers and 

investors require reliable predictions of betas, these issues accentuate the importance of deriving 

accurate estimates of firm -level betas across different market regimes. 

In this study, we forecast asymmetric betas using machine learning methods and firm -specific 

characteristics. Focusing on asymmetric risk measures offers several key benefits, as asymmetric betas 

more directly capture how risk varies across different market conditions by distinguishing between 

downside losses and upside gains . Employing machine learning methods provides two key advantages. 

First, by allowing for nonlinearities these models can capture complex relationships between firm 

characteristics and asymmetric risk measures that linear models may overlook. Second, methods that 

perform variable selection alleviate the issue of overfitting in a high -dim ensional predictor space by 

focusing on the most relevant firm characteristics and shrinking or excluding those that contribute little 

to predictive accuracy. Together, these features make it possible to generate more accurate and stable 

forecasts of asymmetric betas . Moreover, this framework allows us to uncover the nonlinear 

relationships that govern time -varying risk exposures and to identify the important characteristics that 

explain asymmetric betas. By shifting attention from regular market beta to as ymmetric risk measures, 

and by leveraging high -dimensional data through machine learning, we deliver new insights into the 

drivers of systematic risk and offer more accurate tools to the financial -decision making process of 

capital budgeting and portfolio risk management .2

Specifically, we forecast the downside and upside betas by Ang et al. (2006) and the four 

semibetas proposed by Bollerslev et al. (2022). The performance evaluation is designed to prevent 

overfitting, whether from excessive model complexity or backtest bias. We consider a long sample 

period covering a broad cross -section of US stocks and a comprehensive predictor set comprised of 214 

historical beta estimates and firm -specific characteristics from the Chen and Zimmermann (2022) open -

source asset pricing dat abase. Furthermore, we evaluate model performance using an out -of -sample 

rolling window scheme, consistent with Drobetz et al. (2025) and tune the hyperparameters based on 

commonly used values in a time series cross -validation framework, following Gu et al . (2020). Our 

approach, in line with Cosemans et al. (2016), also benefits from combining data sampled from different 

frequencies, since we use daily data to estimate realized asymmetric betas, while monthly data are used 

for the firm characteristics and to fit the machine learning models. This differs from the MIDAS 

approaches by Ghysels et al. (200 5) and Engle et al. (2013) that use both low - and high -frequency time -

series data to model risk directly. We also assess the role of conditional betas in a discounted cash flow 

analysis when discount rates are estimated using forecasts from both individual and multiple horizons .

Lastly , we examine whether the conditional beta forecasts would benefit an investor construct ing 

optimal portf olios based on factor models by reducing exposure to market risk. 

The asymmetric risk effects of betas have been widely explored in the literature. Bawa and 

Lindenberg (1977) suggest an extension of the CAPM with asymmetric downside and upside betas, 

where risk is measured using the semivariance based on negative or positive market returns, rather than 

total variance. Ang et al. (2006) measure downside and upside betas over periods when the excess 

market return is below or above its mean and find that a downside beta version of the CAPM is better 

at explaining the cross -sectional variation of stock returns than the regular CAPM. In addition, Lettau 

et al. (2014) show that accounting for downside risk in the CAPM can better explain the variation in 

returns across different asset classes. By contrast, Levi and Welch (2020) f ind that regular market beta 

is better at explaining the cross -sectional variation in stock returns than downside beta, even during bear 

markets and crashes. 

More recently, Bollerslev et al. (2022), propose a new decomposition of the traditional market 

beta into four semibetas that depend on the signed covariation between the market and individual asset 3

returns. Consistent with the literature which suggests that investors only care about downside risk, they 

find that semibetas derived from negative market and negative asset return covariation are better at 

explaining higher expected returns, while semibetas based on negative market and positive asset return 

covariation are better at explaining lower expected returns. 

Similarly extensive is the literature that focuses on producing more accurate estimates of future 

market betas. Engle (2016) and Bali et al. (2017) show that dynamic conditional beta based on 

multivariate GARCH models performs well in the cross -section of stock returns. Levi and Welch 

(2017), motivated by the need for improved beta estimates by corporate financial managers, propose a 

linear estimator for forward -looking beta estimates, using only the prevailing empirical beta. Chang et 

al. (2012) develop an option -implied approach to estimate beta and show that it often outperforms the 

historical beta in the cross -section. Buss and Vilkov (2012) propose a hybrid methodology that 

combines option -implied with historical return information, which is found to pe rform well against 

other estimators. Hollstein and Prokopczuk (2016) examine the performance of several historical, time -

series, and option -implied estimators. They find that including information from option markets can be 

beneficia l, with estimators such as the simple historical beta and the Kalman filter exhibiting smaller 

errors than those based on multivariate GARCH models. Another strand of literature explores the 

quality of the beta estimates in different frequencies. Becker et al. (2021) show that a long -memory 

estimator of beta provides superior forecasting performance than short - or infinite -memory alternatives, 

while in an international setting, Hollstein (2020), also finds that betas exhibit long -run dependence. 

Hollstein et al. (2020), show that using intraday data improves the performance of the conditional 

CAPM, compared to those based on lower frequencies. In contrast , Gilbert et al. (2014), find that betas 

based on lower frequencies lead to lower pricing errors relative to those estimated using higher 

frequency data. 

A related strand of literature accounts for the time -variation and estimation error in beta by 

incorporating information based on firm -specific characteristics or aggregate economic variables to the 

estimates of individual security betas (e.g., Shanken, 19 90; Ferson and Schadt, 1996; Jagannathan and 

Wang, 1996). Commonly used variables include the yield or volatility of the one -month Treasury Bill, 

the term and default spreads, the dividend yield or a function of consumption, asset wealth, and labour 4

income (Lettau and Ludvigson, 2001). Guo et al. (2017) consider several conditioning variables and 

uncover that the earnings -price ratio, inflation, and the unemployment rate are the best predictors for 

the beta of the value premium. Hollstein et al. (2019) assume that beta is a linear function of state 

variables and find that models that depend on economic information perform worse than the simple 

historical beta. 

Cosemans et al. (2016), propose a conditional beta model that shrinks market beta estimates 

toward an economically informative prior unique to each firm. Their approach yields superior out -of -

sample benefits and outperforms commonly used estimators of regu lar market beta. Kim et al. (2021) 

and Kelly et al. (2021) indicate that using firm -specific characteristics can also help improve the 

estimates of time -varying market betas. More recently, Drobetz et al. (2025), adopt the additive 

prediction error model b y Gu et al. (2020 ), to model firm -specific realized beta using a large set of firm -

level fundamental variables and a wide range of machine learning models. They find that tree -based 

approaches perform best, with historical betas, turnover and size signals being key predictors. 

We complement this literature by estimating conditional asymmetric betas across horizons 

using a large set of firm -specific characteristics and a range of machine learning models with flexible 

functional forms that can be nonlinear or perform variable selection. While prior studies have primarily 

focused on modelling the regular market beta, w e extend this framework to asymmetric risk measures 

that capture how systematic risk varies across market conditions. This enables us to evaluate the extent 

to which m achine learning techniques enhance the estimation of downside and upside betas, and the 

four semibetas. Furthermore, this approach allows us to assess not only the predictive gains from 

modelling asymmetry and nonlinearity in risk exposures, but also to uncover the firm -level 

characteristics that drive their dynamics. Our study bridges the literature on modelling asymmetric risk 

with machine learning in finance, providing new evidence on the structure , predictability and economic 

value of firm -level conditi onal betas. 

Our main result is that conditional asymmetric betas estimated using machine learning 

techniques and a large set of firm -specific characteristics deliver statistically significant outperformance 

relative to the historical benchmark. Out -of -sample performance is strongest at short horizons and 

declines monotonically as the forecasting horizon increases . Overall, nonlinear models exhibit higher 5

predictive accuracy than linear models, with the difference becoming more pronounced at longer 

horizons, indicating the importance of nonlinearities in forecasting asymmetric risk. Forecast 

combinations of nonlinear models deliver the highest accuracy acro ss the majority of beta measures and 

horizons , while random forests consistently yields competitive performance among individual models. 

For example, in the case of downside beta, a combination of nonlinear models yields an out -of -

sample  𝑅 2 value of approximately 46% that declines to 24% as the forecasting horizon increases from 

one to twelve months. Similarly, for upside beta, the corresponding values range from 18% to 45% . For 

concordant semibetas, the predictive accuracy of the forecast combination across horizons is between 

25% and 46% for the negative semibeta and from 23 % to 42 % for the positive semibeta. In contrast, 

discordant semibetas become more challenging to predict at longer horizons . However, nonlinear 

methods exhibit the strongest performance consistently outperforming other conditional estimators. 

Examining t he evolution of model performance over time we find that conditional beta 

forecasts generate persistent gains relative to the benchmark with models exhibit ing a consistent upward 

trend in cumulative performance across asymmetric beta measures throughout the out -of -sample period ,

with this pattern being more prominent at shorter horizons . For longer forecasting horizons the 

difference s in performance across models become s more pronounced, with combinations of nonlinear 

models and random forests delivering the strongest predictive gains, especially in the aftermath of the 

global financial crisis . While downside and upside betas display similar dynamics across horizons, 

performance for semibetas is more heterogeneous, with nonlinear models generally providing the most 

consistent improvements, particularly for the discordant semibetas in the second half of the sample. 

A cross -sectional analysis of forecast errors for the asymmetric betas shows that beta estimators 

tend to overpredict low -beta stocks and underpredict high -beta stocks , with t his bias increasing 

monotonically across quintile portfolios sorted on beta. We find that machine learning models reduce 

the magnitude of th is bias relative to the benchmark, indicating more stable forecasts. At short horizons, 

conditional betas produce smaller forecast errors than the benchmark across all quintile portfolios. At 

long horizons , the predictive gains of conditional models diminish, however, they continue to 

outperform the benchmark primarily in the middle and upper quintile portfolios .6

We also perform a variable importance analysis to identify the predictor groups that contribute 

most to model performance over the out -of -sample period . Across all beta measures, variables related 

to trading frictions emerge as the most influential predictors, indicating the importance of characteristics 

such as historical beta estimators in capturing variation in asymmetric risk . The dominance of this group 

of characteristics is stronger for linear models, where average variable importance is highly 

concen trated with values ranging from 80% to 95%, while for nonlinear models it is more balanced 

with values in the range of 31% to 78%. The more diversified predictor set of the nonlinear models 

includes characteristics from intangibles, momentum and the value -versus -growth groups . Overall, 

variable importance is more dispersed across predictor groups for the discordant semibetas relative to 

other asymmetric beta measures, with these patterns remaining consistent across forecasting horizons. 

Building on Bollerslev et al. (2022), we also explore the predictive accuracy of regular market 

beta reconstructed from asymmetric beta components . We find that combining machine learning -based 

forecasts from downside and upside betas or from the four semibetas yields statistically significant 

predictive gains relative to the benchmark, highlighting the value of a more granular decomposition of 

systematic risk. Overall, forecast combinations of nonlinear models or tree -based methods provide the 

most accurate representation of CAPM beta, with this outperformance becoming more evident at longer 

horizons . For example, forecast combinations of nonlinear models attain  𝑅 2 in the range of 12 % to 

37%, depending on specification and forecasting horizon . Over time , the model performance diminishes 

as horizon increases and the combination of nonlinear forecasts shows consistent predictive gains 

compared to that of linear models , which are stronger for the second half of the out -of -sample period. 

In the cross -section, conditional estimators reduce the bias of overpredicting low -beta stocks and 

underpredicting high -beta stocks relative to the benchmark , leading to more stable forecasts especially 

in the lower and middle parts of the beta distribution. 

Given that the vast majority of corporate managers continue to rely on the CAPM for estimating 

the cost of equity (Graham and Harvey, 2001; Graham, 2022), we examine whether the predictive gains 

from conditional beta forecasts translate into improved equit y valuation within a discounted cash flow 

framework. We find that valuation accuracy varies with both the forecasting horizon and the underlying 

economic assumptions. While single -horizon beta forecasts offer improved valuation accuracy at short 7

horizons, their predictive power decays at longer horizons, and under low growth and high market risk 

premium scenarios. In contrast, allowing discount rates to vary across horizons by using multi -horizon 

conditional beta forecasts leads to substantial gai ns in valuation accuracy relative to single -horizon 

approaches. This outperformance is more pronounced for forecast combinations of nonlinear models 

and the semibeta decomposition, where in high -growth scenarios the out -of -sample  𝑅 2 exceeds 60%. 

These findings highlight the economic value of adopting a more granular, multi -horizon approach to 

estimating systematic risk, indicating that accounting for the term structure of conditional betas 

improves equity valuation and capital budget ing decisions. 

Lastly, w e investigate whether the predictive gains for asymmetric beta forecasts based on 

machine learning models translate into significant economic value in asset allocation decisions . We 

demonstrate that conditional beta estimates offer considerable benefits for investors who rely on factor 

models to construct optimal portfolios , by imposing a factor structure on the covariance matrix and 

forming market -neutral portfolios. We find that portfolios based on conditional betas deliver improved 

hedging perfo rmance relative to the benchmark. The distribution of ex -post portfolio betas is tightly 

centered around zero, while benchmark portfolios exhibit significant deviations from market neutrality 

across horizons . Portfolios based on forecast combinations of nonlinear models exhibit the best 

performance at short horizons, with their performance persisting at longer horizons. Overall, these 

results indicate that incorporating conditional beta forecasts based on a large number of characteristics 

into portfolio con struction leads to improved hedging of market risk .

The remainder of this study is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the methodology used 

to estimate asymmetric betas and the machine learning models. Section 3 provides details on the data, 

sample splitting and hyperparameter tuning. Section 4 analys es the empirical results of the out -of -

sample statistical and economic evaluation , while Section 5 concludes. 

## 2. Asymmetric Beta Estimation 

In this Section we initially describe the estimation of realized downside and upside betas and the four 

semibetas, followed by a discussion of modelling realized betas using machine learning. 8

## 2.1. Realized Asymmetric Betas 

The CAPM indicates that the expected return on an asset in excess of the risk -free rate is related to 

market beta, through the following linear equation: 

𝐸 (𝑟 𝑖 ) = 𝛽 𝑖 𝐸 (𝑟 𝑚 ), (1)

where  𝐸 (𝑟 𝑖 ) and  𝐸 (𝑟 𝑚 ) denote the expected excess return on the asset  𝑖  and the market portfolio 

respectively, and  𝛽 𝑖  is the market beta, for  𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑁 , with  𝑁  being the number of assets. The market 

beta for asset  𝑖  is then defined as: 

𝛽 𝑖 = 𝐶𝑜𝑣 (𝑟 𝑖 , 𝑟 𝑚 )

𝑉𝑎𝑟 (𝑟 𝑚 ) . (2)

According to the CAPM, market beta is constant across periods of high and low market returns. 

Bawa and Lindenberg (1977) propose an extension of the CAPM by specifying downside and upside 

betas, to account for the asymmetric treatment of risk. We follow An g et al. (2006) and compute 

downside (upside) beta over periods when the excess market return is below (above) a specific cutoff 

point. 4 Specifically, the CAPM equation during down and up markets is defined as: 

𝐸 (𝑟 𝑖 |𝑟 𝑚 < 0) = 𝛽 𝑖 

> −

𝐸 (𝑟 𝑚 |𝑟 𝑚 < 0) and 𝐸 (𝑟 𝑖 |𝑟 𝑚 > 0) = 𝛽 𝑖 

> +

𝐸 (𝑟 𝑚 |𝑟 𝑚 > 0), (3)

and is conditional that market excess returns being negative or positive, while  𝛽 𝑖  

> −

and  𝛽 𝑖  

> +

denote the 

downside and upside beta respectively. The downside and upside betas can be defined as 

𝛽 𝑖  

> −

= 𝐶𝑜𝑣 (𝑟 𝑖 , 𝑟 𝑚 

> −

)

𝑉𝑎𝑟 (𝑟 𝑚 

> −

) and 𝛽 𝑖  

> +

= 𝐶𝑜𝑣 (𝑟 𝑖 , 𝑟 𝑚 

> +

)

𝑉𝑎𝑟 (𝑟 𝑚 

> +

) , (4)

where  𝑟 𝑚  

> −

and  𝑟 𝑚  

> +

denote the market returns in down and up markets respectively. 

Bollerslev et al. (2022) propose a four -way decomposition of regular market beta into four 

semibetas. This decomposition relies on the semicovariance concepts by Bollerslev et al. (2020). Each 

semibeta uses a different component of the total covariation  𝐶𝑜𝑣 (𝑟 𝑖 , 𝑟 𝑚 ), with semicovariance 

components being defined by both asset and market returns being negative,  𝒩 , both returns being  

> 4

The measures of  𝛽 𝑖  

> −

and  𝛽 𝑖  

> +

we consider use returns relative to the zero rate of return, as a cutoff point to 

determine down markets and up markets. Alternative cutoff points, between down markets and up markets, include 

the realized average market excess return and the risk -free ra te of return. Ang et al. (2006) show, for both downside 

and upside measures of beta, that the estimators based on the three types of cutoff points are highly correlated, 

and that their results are driven by the emphasis placed on losses versus gains instea d of the particular cutoff point 

used as the benchmark. 9

positive,  𝒫 , mixed sign with negative market return,  ℳ− and mixed sign with positive market return, 

ℳ+. The four semibetas are defined as: 

𝛽 𝑖 𝒩 = 𝐶𝑜𝑣 (𝑟 𝑖 −, 𝑟 𝑚 

> −

)

𝑉𝑎𝑟 (𝑟 𝑚 ) , 𝛽 𝑖 𝒫 = 𝐶𝑜𝑣 (𝑟 𝑖 +, 𝑟 𝑚 

> +

)

𝑉𝑎𝑟 (𝑟 𝑚 ) , 𝛽 𝑖 ℳ−

= 𝐶𝑜𝑣 (𝑟 𝑖 +, 𝑟 𝑚 

> −

)

𝑉𝑎𝑟 (𝑟 𝑚 ) , 𝛽 𝑖 ℳ+

= 𝐶𝑜𝑣 (𝑟 𝑖 −, 𝑟 𝑚 

> +

)

𝑉𝑎𝑟 (𝑟 𝑚 ) , (5)

where  𝑟 𝑖 − and  𝑟 𝑖 + denote the returns of asset  𝑖  in down and up markets respectively. The semibetas 

condition on the covariation of both the signed asset returns and signed market returns, in contrast to 

downside and upside betas, which condition only on the sign of market returns. 

In this study we focus on modelling the  ℎ-month ahead realized beta. Specifically, we estimate 

betas for horizons of  ℎ = 1, 3, 6, 12  months. Andersen et al. (2006) show that under weak regularity 

conditions only, realized beta is a consistent estimator of the underlying beta. Using daily returns over 

the past  ℎ months, realized market beta is derived as: 

𝛽 ̂𝑖 = ∑ 𝑟 𝑖 𝑟 𝑚 𝑡 

∑ 𝑟 𝑚 

> 2
> 𝑡

, (6)

while downside and upside betas are derived as: 

𝛽 ̂𝑖  

> −

= ∑ 𝑟 𝑖 𝑟 𝑚 

> −
> 𝑡

∑ (𝑟 𝑚 

> −

)2

> 𝑡

, 𝛽 ̂𝑖  

> +

= ∑ 𝑟 𝑖 𝑟 𝑚 

> +
> 𝑡

∑ (𝑟 𝑚 

> +

)2

> 𝑡

, (7)

where  𝑟 𝑚  

> −

= min (𝑟 𝑚 , 0) and  𝑟 𝑚  

> +

= max (𝑟 𝑚 , 0) are the signed market returns. The realized semibetas are 

similarly defined as: 

𝛽 ̂𝑖 𝒩 = ∑ 𝑟 𝑖 −𝑟 𝑚 

> −
> 𝑡

∑ 𝑟 𝑚 

> 2
> 𝑡

, 𝛽 ̂𝑖 𝒫 = ∑ 𝑟 𝑖 +𝑟 𝑚 

> +
> 𝑡

∑ 𝑟 𝑚 

> 2
> 𝑡

, 𝛽 ̂𝑖 ℳ−

= ∑ 𝑟 𝑖 +𝑟 𝑚 

> −
> 𝑡

∑ 𝑟 𝑚 

> 2
> 𝑡

, 𝛽 ̂𝑖 ℳ+

= ∑ 𝑟 𝑖 −𝑟 𝑚 

> +
> 𝑡

∑ 𝑟 𝑚 

> 2
> 𝑡

, (8)

where  𝑟 𝑖 − = min (𝑟 𝑖 , 0) and  𝑟 𝑖 + = max (𝑟 𝑖 , 0) are the signed returns of asset  𝑖 .5

Following studies such as Cosemans et al. (2016) and Hollstein and Prokopczuk (2016), we use 

ex -post realized beta to evaluate the accuracy of the ex -ante beta estimates obtained from different 

estimators. Downside and upside betas in addition to the four semibetas are constructed for the realized 

beta estimator and modelled using a large set of firm -specific characteristics and machine learning 

techniques.  

> 5

Since the mixed sign semicovariances are always weakly negative numbers, we follow Bollerslev et al. (2022) 

and set  𝛽 ̂𝑖 ℳ−

= − ∑ 𝑟 𝑖 +𝑟 𝑚  

> −
> 𝑡

∑ 𝑟 𝑚 

> 2
> 𝑡

⁄ and  𝛽 ̂𝑖 ℳ+

= − ∑ 𝑟 𝑖 −𝑟 𝑚  

> +
> 𝑡

∑ 𝑟 𝑚 

> 2
> 𝑡

⁄ in our analysis for ease of interpretation .10 

## 2.2. Conditional Measures of Asymmetric Betas 

The estimators of beta described in this section are conditioned on firm -characteristics. Specifically, 

firm -specific signals are incorporated in models that combine information from multiple predictors 

using flexible functions. 

Following Shanken (1990) and Ferson and Schadt (1996) we parametrize asymmetric beta as a 

function of firm characteristics in a pooled regression setting similar to that of Cosemans et al. (2016) 

and Drobetz et al. (2025) . Specifically, we estimate each {𝛽 −, 𝛽 +, 𝛽 𝒩 , 𝛽 𝒫 , 𝛽 ℳ−

, 𝛽 ℳ+

} of individual 

securities using models that combine information through machine learning methods. 

Let  𝛽 𝑖 ,𝑡 +ℎ 

> 𝑟𝑙

be the realized beta for asset  𝑖  at month  𝑡 + ℎ and  𝒙 𝑖 ,𝑡  be the  𝑃 × 1 vector of 

predictors for asset  𝑖  at month  𝑡 , for  𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑁  and  𝑡 = 1, … , 𝑇 . We describe an asset’s realized beta 

using the additive prediction error model by Gu, et al. (2020): 

𝛽 𝑖 ,𝑡 +ℎ 

> 𝑟𝑙

= 𝐸 𝑡 (𝛽 𝑖 ,𝑡 +ℎ 

> 𝑟𝑙

) + 𝜀 𝑖 ,𝑡 +ℎ, where 𝐸 𝑡 (𝛽 𝑖 ,𝑡 +ℎ 

> 𝑟𝑙

) = 𝑓 (𝒙 𝑖 ,𝑡 ). (9)

In this model the expected beta,  𝐸 𝑡 (𝛽 𝑖 ,𝑡 +ℎ 

> 𝑟𝑙

), is connected to the  𝑃 -dimensional vector of the predictors, 

𝒙 𝑖 ,𝑡 , through a flexible function,  𝑓 (∙), of the predictors. 

A regression framework is adopted to estimate beta, where the goal is to minimize the residual 

sum of squares. In this case the least squares objective of the panel predictive regression is 

argmin 

> 𝜽

ℒ(𝜽 ) = argmin 

> 𝜽

[ 1

𝑁𝑇 ∑ (𝛽 𝑗  

> 𝑟𝑙

− 𝑓 (𝒙 𝑗 ; 𝜽 ))2

> 𝑁𝑇
> 𝑗 =1

], (10 )

where  ℒ(∙) is the least squares loss and  𝑓 (𝒙 𝑗 ; 𝜽 ) is a flexible function of the predictors with parameters 

𝜽 . The out -of -sample forecast of beta  𝛽 𝑟𝑙  of asset  𝑖  at month  𝑡 + ℎ based on the panel predictive 

regression and data available through  𝑡 , is given by 

𝛽 ̂𝑖 ,𝑡 +ℎ 

> 𝑟𝑙

= 𝑓 ̂ (𝒙 𝑖 ,𝑡 ; 𝜽 ̂ ), (11 )

where  𝑓 ̂ is the estimate of  𝑓  based on data through  𝑡 . Because the panel is high dimensional, we use a 

variety of machine learning algorithms to approximate  𝑓 .11 

## 2.2.1. Linear Machine Learning Methods 

Principal component analysis (PCA) and partial least squares (PLS) reduce the dimension of the 

predictors,  𝑃 , to a smaller dimension of latent factors  𝐾 . The predictive model for both approaches is: 

𝜷 𝑟𝑙 = 𝑓 (𝐗 ) = (𝐗𝐖 )𝜽  (12 )

where  𝜷 𝑟𝑙  is the  𝑁𝑇 × 1 vector of realized asymmetric betas,  𝛽 𝑖 ,𝑡 +ℎ 

> 𝑟𝑙

, 𝐗  is the  𝑁𝑇 × 𝑃  matrix of stacked 

predictors  𝒙 𝑖 ,𝑡 , 𝐖  is the  𝑃 × 𝐾  matrix of weights, with columns (𝐰 1, … , 𝐰 𝐾 ) for  𝐾 ≪ 𝑃  and  𝜽  is the 

𝐾 × 1 coefficient vector. Each  𝐰 𝑘 , 𝑘 = 1, … , 𝐾 , is the set of linear combination weights used to create 

the  𝑘 th latent factor thus,  𝐗 𝐖  is the dimension reduced version of the original predictors. We treat the 

number of latent factors as a hyperparameter with  𝐾 ∈ [1,10 ].

PCA can be used to find the first  𝐾  principal component weight vectors by minimizing: 

argmin 

> 𝐖

‖𝐗 − 𝐗𝐖 𝐖 ′‖2, s.t. 𝐖 ′𝐖 = 𝐈 𝐾 , (13 )

where  𝐈 𝐾  is a 𝐾 × 𝐾  identity matrix. The matrix  𝐖  can be estimated using singular value 

decomposition : 𝐗 = 𝐔𝐃 𝐕 ′, by setting  𝐖 = 𝐕 . The columns of  𝐕 = (𝐯 1, … , 𝐯 𝐾 ) are the principal 

components weights. Each weight vector is used to derive the  𝑘 th  principal component,  𝐗 𝐯 𝑘 . The 

variable  𝐗 𝐯 1 is the first principal component and has the largest sample variance amongst all linear 

combinations of the columns of  𝐗 .

PLS identifies the features in a supervised way, by constructing  𝐾  linear combinations of  𝐗  that 

have maximum correlation with the target. To find the reduced version of the predictor set, the columns 

of the weight matrix  𝐖  need to be obtained through consecutive optimization problems. The criterion 

to find the  𝑘 th  estimated weight vector is 

argmax 

> 𝑤

[𝐰 ′𝐌𝐰 ], s.t. 𝐰 ′𝐰 = 1, 𝐰 ′𝚺 𝐗𝐗 𝐰 = 0, (14 )

where  𝚺 𝐗𝐗  is the covariance of  𝐗  and  𝐌 = 𝐗 ′𝜷 𝑟𝑙 𝜷 𝑟𝑙 ′𝐗 . The version of PLS we employ is SIMPLS 

proposed by de Jong (1993). 

Penalized regression is similar to the simple linear model, in that it considers only the baseline, 

untransformed predictors, however, it modifies the least squares problem by adding one additional 

penalty term to the loss function: 12 

argmin 

> 𝜽

[ℒ(𝜽 ) + 𝒫 (𝜽 ; ⋅)] , where 𝒫 (𝜽 ; ⋅) = ∑ 𝒫 (𝜃 𝑖 ; ⋅)

> 𝑝
> 𝑖 =1

. (15 )

There are several choices for the penalty function  𝒫 (⋅). In this study we consider the elastic net (EN) 

penalty proposed by Zou and Hastie (2005), which is a combination of the ridge and lasso penalties. 

The elastic net is a convex penalty given by the following function: 

𝒫 (𝜃 𝑖 ; 𝜆 ; 𝑎 ) = 𝜆 [𝑎 |𝜃 𝑖 | + (1 − 𝑎 )𝜃 𝑖 

> 2

], (16 )

where  𝜆  > 0 is a tuning parameter, which is determined separately and controls the amount of shrinkage 

and  𝑎  is a hyperparameter that controls the trade -off between  𝑙 1 and  𝑙 2 regularization. The elastic net 

combines both  𝑙 1 and  𝑙 2 terms in the penalty, thus simultaneously performing continuous shrinkage, 

automatic variable selection and can also select groups of correlated variables. The grid of the 

hyperparameters for the elastic net penalty are  𝜆  ∈ [10 −3, 10 3] and  𝑎  ∈ [0, 1].

## 2.2.2. Non linear Machine Learning Methods 

A regression tree is a non -parametric model that is constructed using a recursive binary splitting 

approach. At first, starting from the bottom of the tree or the root, the predictor set is divided into two 

distinct and non -overlapping rectangular regions or leaves and then the realized beta is computed as 

simple average of  𝛽 𝑟𝑙  within that region. Then one or both of those regions are split into two more 

regions and this process continues until certain stopping criteria are met. The predictor variable upon 

which a branch is based, and the value where the branch is split, is chos en to minimize the forecast 

error. Specifically, the prediction of a tree,  𝒯 , with  𝑀  leaves  𝑅 1, 𝑅 2, … , 𝑅 𝑀  and maximum depth  𝐷 , is 

defined as  𝒯 (𝒙 𝑖 ,𝑡 , 𝑐 , 𝑀 , 𝐷 ) = ∑ 𝑐 𝑚 I{𝒙 𝑖 ,𝑡 ∈𝑅 𝑚 (𝐷 )} 

> 𝑀
> 𝑚 =1

, where  𝑅 𝑚 (𝐷 ) represents one of the partitions of the 

predictor space. The score  𝑐  associated with partition  𝑚 , 𝑐 𝑚 , is the simple average of realized beta 

within region  𝑅 𝑚 , written as  𝑐 𝑚 = 1 𝑇𝑁 𝑚 ⁄ ∑ 𝛽 𝑟𝑙  

> 𝒙 𝑖 ,𝑡 𝜖 𝑅 𝑚

, where  𝑇𝑁 𝑚  denotes the number of observations 

in region  𝑚 . At each branch the sorting variable is chosen among the set of predictors and the split value 

that minimize the following loss function: 

𝑄 𝑚 (𝒙 𝑖 ,𝑡 , 𝑐 , 𝑇𝑁 𝑚 ) = 1

𝑇𝑁 𝑚 

∑ (𝛽 𝑟𝑙 − 𝑐 𝑚 )2

> 𝒙 𝑖 ,𝑡 ∈𝑅 𝑚

. (17 )13 

Branching halts when the depth,  𝐷 , of the tree reaches a pre -specified threshold that is tuned adaptively 

using a validation sample. 

The first ensemble approach is based on gradient boosting (GB) by Friedman (2001), which 

recursively combines a large number of shallow regression trees, known as “weak learners”, to form an 

ensemble of trees with greater stability than a single more compl ex tree. Gradient boosting is initialized 

by fitting a shallow tree, then a second tree with the same depth is used to fit the residuals of the previous 

model and the forecasts of these two trees are added together to form a single ensemble prediction. Thi s

procedure is repeated sequentially until the total number of iterations  𝐾  is reached. Gradient boosting 

is an additive model that can be expressed as 

𝑓 (𝒙 𝑖 ,𝑡 , 𝐾 ) = ∑ 𝑓 𝑘 (𝒙 𝑖 ,𝑡 , 𝑐 𝑘 , 𝑀 𝑘 , 𝐷 , 𝑣 )

> 𝐾
> 𝑘 =1

, (18 )

where  𝐾  is the total number of trees and  𝑓 𝑘  is given by  𝑓 𝑘 (𝒙 𝑖 ,𝑡 , 𝑣 ) = 𝑓 𝑘 −1(𝒙 𝑖 ,𝑡 ) + 𝑣 𝒯 𝑘 (𝒙 𝑖 ,𝑡 , 𝑐 𝑘 , 𝑀 𝑘 , 𝐷 ).

The parameter  𝑣  controls the learning rate of the boosting procedure that scales the contribution of each 

tree to the ensemble by a factor of  0 < 𝑣 < 1 and prevents the model from overfitting the residuals. We 

set the range of the hyperparameters for the gradient boosting model to  𝐾 ∈ [1,500 ], 𝐷 ∈ [1, 2] and 

𝑣 ∈ {0.1, 0.01 }. We also consider early stopping, where the training process stops prematurely when 

the validation error has not decreased for 50 iterations. 

The second ensemble method we consider is random forests (RF) by Breiman (2001), which is 

based on bootstrap aggregating or bagging and combines many noisy but approximately unbiased 

models to reduce the variance of the estimates. The baseline bagging proc edure estimates  𝒯 1, 𝒯 2, … , 𝒯 𝐵 

based on  𝐵  different bootstrap samples of the data and then averages their forecasts to obtain a single 

low -variance model, given by 

𝑓 (𝒙 𝑖 ,𝑡 , 𝐵 ) = 1

𝐵 ∑ 𝒯 𝑏 (𝒙 𝑖 ,𝑡 , 𝑐 𝑏 , 𝑀 𝑏 , 𝐷 )

> 𝐵
> 𝑏 =1

. (19 )

Random forests build a set of de -correlated trees by considering only a randomly drawn subset of 

predictors for splitting at each potential branch. This lowers the average correlation among predictions 

and further reduces the variance relative to bagging. We set the range of the hyperparameters for random 14 

forests to  𝐵 = 200 , 𝐷 ∈ [5,10 ,15 ,20 ] and the fraction of the predictors considered for each split to the 

square root of the predictors available in each iteration of the rolling window. 

Feed -forward neural networks (FFNN) can be defined as a composition of  ℎ(1), ℎ(2), … , ℎ(𝐿 )

nonlinear activation functions for each of the  𝐿  hidden layers of the network  𝒛 (𝐿 ) = ℎ(𝐿 ) ∘ … ∘ ℎ(2) ∘

ℎ(1)(𝒙 ), with  𝒛 (𝑙 ) = ℎ (𝑏 0 

> (𝑙 )

+ 𝒘 (𝑙 )′𝒛 (𝑙 −1)), for  𝑙 = 1, 2, … , 𝐿 , where  𝒛 (𝑙 ) is the  𝑙 th layer of the network 

with  𝑚 = 1, 2, … , 𝑀  nodes,  𝒘 (𝑙 ) is the matrix of weights and  𝑏 0 

> (𝑙 )

is the bias. For the first hidden layer 

the input is the matrix of predictors,  𝒛 (0) = 𝒙 , such that  𝒛 (1) = ℎ (𝑏 0 

> (1)

+ 𝒘 (1)′𝒙 ). The results from each 

hidden layer are aggregated in the output layer: 

𝑓 (𝒙 ) = 𝑏 0 

> (𝐿 +1)

+ 𝐰 (𝐿 +1)′𝒛 (𝐿 ). (20 )

The activation function applied to each node can take various forms. We follow the existing literature 

and use the rectified linear unit (ReLU) defined as  ℎ(𝑥 ) = max (0, 𝑥 ), which encourages sparsity in the 

number of active nodes and avoids the vanishing gradient problem (Glorot et al., 2011). The neural 

network is trained using stochastic gradient descent and specifically the adaptive moment estimation 

algorithm (Adam) by Kingma and Ba (2015). Adam computes individual adaptive learning rates for the 

model parameters using estimates of first and second moments of the gradients. 

Training a neural network can be challenging due to the large number of parameters to be 

estimated and the nonconvexity of the objective function. To alleviate those concerns we employ 

various tools to reduce estimation error. First, we use dropout (Srivas tava et al., 2014), which randomly 

sets a fraction of the hidden units to zero at each iteration, thus preventing the neural network from 

overfitting. To improve the performance of the model we also implement early stopping, batch 

normalization and forecas t averaging. 

In each iteration of the optimization algorithm the parameter estimates are updated so as to 

reduce prediction errors in the training sample and then the predictive performance of the model for 

that iteration is evaluated using data from the validation sam ple. Early stopping is implemented by 

stopping the training process prematurely when the validation error no longer decreases. Specifically, 

the optimization process halts when the maximum number of iterations (100) is reached or if the 

validation error ha s not improved for 5 consecutive iterations, preventing overfitting and significantly 15 

speed ing up the training process. In both cases the parameter estimates of the best performing model 

are retrieved. 

Batch normalization (Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015) reduces the variability of the predictors by 

scaling the input of activations. It was proposed to solve the problem of internal covariate shift in which 

the distribution of the inputs of the hidden layer change during training, as the parameters of the 

previous layers change. For each node in each training step, the algorithm cross -sectionally standardizes 

the output of a previous activation to restore the representation power of the node. This helps to increase 

the stability of the neural network and increase the speed of training. 

Finally, to reduce the prediction variance of the neural network, due to the stochastic nature of 

the optimization, we adopt an ensemble approach by forming the final prediction from the average of 

the forecasts from ten models initialized from different r andom seeds. For the hyperparameters of the 

neural networks we set the learning rate to {0.001 , 0.01 }, the dropout rate to {0.1, 0.2, 0.3}, while the 

parameters for Adam are left to the defaults. We also treat the depth of the network as a hyperparameter 

and consider neural networks with up to three layers. The number of units in each layer depends on the 

depth of the network (a network with three l ayers would have 32 units in the first hidden layer, 16 in 

the second and 8 in the last hidden layer). 

## 2.2. 3. Forecast Combinations 

We also construct forecast combinations of the linear (CLIN) and nonlinear (CNL) machine learning 

models to combine the predictive power of multiple models (Goyal and Welch, 2008). Following Bates 

and Granger (1969), we consider a simple combination that equally weights the individual forecasts 

from each set of models, an approach which Rapach et al. (2010) show can lead to significant benefits 

in predictive performance. The forecast combination estimate of realized asymmetric beta,  𝛽 ̂𝑖 

> 𝑟𝑙 ,𝐶

, of 

asset  𝑖  at month  𝑡 + ℎ, based on  𝑀  individual model forecasts,  𝛽 ̂𝑖  

> 𝑟𝑙 ,𝑚

is: 

𝛽 ̂𝑖 ,𝑡 +ℎ 

> 𝑟𝑙 ,𝐶

= 1

𝑀 ∑ 𝛽 ̂𝑖 ,𝑡 +ℎ

> 𝑟𝑙 ,𝑚
> 𝑀
> 𝑚 =1

. (21 )

Creating ensembles of linear and nonlinear models allows us to directly assess the benefits of accounting 

for nonlinearities and combine the predictive power of multiple machine learning approaches. 16 

## 3. Data and Sample Splitting 

The data set used to construct the asymmetric betas is based on the post -1978 CRSP database. Each 

period, the sample contains stock returns from common stocks (share codes 10 and 11), trading on the 

NYSE, the AMEX, and the NASDAQ exchanges (exchange codes 1, 2 or 3), with positive volume ,

with a stock price greater than $ 5 and with monthly market capitalization above the 20% NYSE 

threshold . In addition to stock return data, we use the daily value -weighted return (including 

distributions) market index from C RSP as a proxy for the market portfolio and the risk -free rate of 

return from Kenneth French’s online data library. 6

The realized asymmetric betas are estimated for each stock in the sample using daily returns 

over a specific period. The beta estimates for a particular month are derived using daily returns over 

four different estimation windows, with  ℎ = 1, 3, 6, 12  months .7 A rolling window is used to estimate 

the monthly realized beta measures, which expands by one (calendar) month at a time until it reaches 

the end of the sample. 

Overall, the predictor set is comprised of 214 firm -specific characteristics. Of those, 207 are 

from the Open Source Asset Pricing database 8 by Chen and Zimmermann (2022) and the remaining 7 

predictors are realized beta estimators of the CAPM beta, the upside and downside betas and the four 

semibetas based on daily data. We categorise the predictors into six groups from Hou et al. (2020) and 

Han et al. (2024), with the number of characteristics in each group given in parentheses: Intangibles 

(59), Investment (34), Momentum (36), Profitability (15), Trading Frictions (35), and Value vs Growth 

(28). Following Gu et al. (2020), we replace missing values in a firm characteristic with the cross -

sectional median of that characteristic at each month for all stocks . Furthermore, we follow Cosemans 

et al. (2016), and winsorize outliers in all firm characteristics to the 0.5th and 99.5th percentile values 

of their cross -sectional distributions and standardize all characteristics by subtracting the cross -sectional                

> 6https://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html
> 7Monthly betas for horizons ℎ=1,3,6,12 are derived for stocks that have at least 15 , 50, 100, or 200 daily
> observations available over the corresponding preceding period.
> 8https://www.openassetpricing.com/ 17

mean and dividing by the cross -sectional standard deviation in each m onth. To avoid look -ahead bias 

we lag all predictors by  ℎ months. Further details on the predictor set can be found in Appendix 2. 

## 3.1. Sample Splitting and Hyperparameter Tuning 

Once we obtain the realized measures of beta, the full sample period begins in January 1980 and ends 

on December 202 4, for a total of  𝑇 = 540  monthly observations (or 4 5 years). To estimate the 

conditional beta measures, we adopt a rolling window approach. The size of the rolling window used 

to estimate the parameters of the predictive models is set to  𝜏 = 120  monthly observations (or ten years) 

and moves across the full sample by one year (or 12 monthly observations) at a time. Following 

Cosemans et al. (2016), a stock is included in a rolling window iteration if its return for the last 36 

months of the rollin g window is available. Since the asymmetric measures of beta being forecasted are 

constructed using  ℎ-months of daily return data, there needs to be a n ℎ-month gap between the end of 

the in -sample period of the rolling window, used for estimating the models, and the out -of -sample 

period, used for constructing the forecasts based on the fitted models and their evaluation with the 

respective realized asymmetric be ta measure. The initial rolling window spans the period from January 

1980 to December 1989, leading to an out -of -sample period from January 199 0 to December 202 4 that 

is used for the out -of -sample evaluation of the alternative beta estimators. 

The machine learning models used to derive the conditional asymmetric beta forecasts rely on 

hyperparameter tuning. The choice of hyperparameters controls the amount of model complexity and 

is critical for the performance of the model. We follow Gu et al. (2020) and adopt the validation sample 

approach, which maintain s the temporal ordering of the data and select the optimal set of values for the 

tuning parameters based on the validation sample. Specifically, in each iteration of the rolling window, 

the in -sample is split into two disjointed periods, the training subsample consisting of the first nine 

years, with the last year used as the validation subsample. In the training subsample the model is 

estimated for several sets of values of the tuning parameter s. The second subsample is used to select the 

optimal set of tuning parameters. Using the parameter estimates for each set of hyperparameters from 

the training sample, conditional beta forecasts are constructed for the observations in the validation 

sample . The optimal set of hyperparameters is chosen to minimize the pooled mean squared error (MSE) 18 

over the validation subsample. The model is re -estimated using the chosen set of hyperparameters and 

all in -sample observations in the iteration of the rolling window.  9

## 3. 2. Descriptive Statistics 

Table 1 reports the time series averages of the cross -sectional means, medians, standard deviations and 

correlations of the realized asymmetric betas across different horizons ( ℎ = 1, 3, 6, 12  months ). The 

downside and upside betas (𝛽 −, 𝛽 +) are on average close to unity , while the two concordant semibetas 

(𝛽 𝒩 , 𝛽 𝒫 ) exhibit on average lower values, and consistent with Bollerslev et al. (2022) we observe that 

they far exceed the two discordant semibetas (𝛽 ℳ−

, 𝛽 ℳ+

). The standard deviation of  𝛽 − and  𝛽 + is 

higher than that of the concordant semibetas, which also exceeds that of the discordant semibeta 

measures. The downside and upside betas are highly correlated with the negative and positive semibetas 

respectively, while the discordant semibetas are weakly positively correlated with each other and exhibit 

low positive or negative correlations with the other beta measures. For all estimation windows, the 

average values remain relatively unchanged, however, the standard deviation decreases and correlations 

increase as the estimation window increases .

[Insert Table 1 About Here] 

Figure 1 presents the unconditional distributions of all beta measures across all months and 

stocks in the sample. The distribution of realized downside and upside betas is symmetric around unity, 

while the semibetas are weakly positive and their distributions are right skewed and centered below 

unity. The distributions of the downside and upside betas, the two concordant betas and those of the two 

discordant betas are respectively almost the same and their shape persists across horizons. 

[Insert Figure 1 About Here]                    

> 9For example, for ℎ=12 ,the sample splitting for the last iteration of the rolling window is January 201 3to
> December 20 21 (108 months) for the training sample, January 202 2to December 202 2(12 months) for the
> validation sample. The model is refit for the optimal hyperparameter set using all in -sample observations, January
> 201 3to December 202 2(120 months). Forecasts are constructed based on the fitted model parameters and
> compared to the realizations from January 202 4to December 202 4(12 months).

19 

## 4. Empirical Analysis 

This section presents the out -of -sample evaluation of the conditional asymmetric beta measures. 

Specifically, we investigate the predictive ability of the conditional beta estimators to forecast the 

respective  ℎ-month ahead ( ℎ = 1, 3, 6, 12 ) realized asymmetric beta. 

## 4.1. Evaluation of Conditional Asymmetric Betas 

Initially, we analyse the forecasts in terms of out -of -sample  𝑅 2 (see, e.g., Campbell and Thompson, 

2008). The  𝑅 2 statistic measures the proportional reduction in mean squared error for the conditional 

asymmetric beta forecast relative to the benchmark: 

𝑅 2 = 1 − MSE 𝓂 

MSE 𝒷 ,

where  MSE 𝓂  is the mean squared error of the alternative forecasting model and  MSE 𝒷  is the mean 

squared error of the benchmark model. Specifically, we compare the forecasts from the conditional 

estimators of asymmetric beta to the historical estimator based on the  ℎ-lagged realized beta measure 

for the respective asymmetric beta. A positive out -of -sample  𝑅 2 value indicates that the conditional beta 

forecast outperforms the benchmark in terms of MSE, while a negative value signals the opposite. 

We consider three versions of out -of -sample  𝑅 2 that differ based on how the MSE statistic has 

been calculated. MSE is derived across all stocks throughout the out -of -sample period as 

Panel MSE ℎ = ∑ 𝑤 𝑗 (𝛽 𝑗  

> 𝑟𝑙

− 𝛽 ̂𝑗 )2

> 𝑁 𝑇 𝑂𝑂𝑆
> 𝑗 =1

,

Time Series MSE ℎ = ∑ 𝑤 𝑖 

1

𝑇 𝑖 𝑂𝑂𝑆 ∑ (𝛽 𝑖 ,𝑡  

> 𝑟𝑙

− 𝛽 ̂𝑖 ,𝑡 )2

> 𝑇 𝑖 𝑂𝑂𝑆
> 𝑡 =1
> 𝑁
> 𝑖 =1

,

Cross Section MSE ℎ = 1

𝑇 𝑂𝑂𝑆 ∑ ∑ 𝑤 𝑖 ,𝑡 (𝛽 𝑖 ,𝑡  

> 𝑟𝑙

− 𝛽 ̂𝑖 ,𝑡 )2

> 𝑁 𝑡
> 𝑖 =1
> 𝑇 𝑂𝑂𝑆
> 𝑡 =1

.

where  𝛽 𝑟𝑙  is the realized beta,  𝛽 ̂ denotes the predicted beta,  𝑇 𝑖 𝑂𝑂𝑆  is the total number of out -of -sample 

observations for firm  𝑖 , 𝑁 𝑡  is the number of firms in period  𝑡  of the out -of -sample and  𝑤  is the weight 

of each stock. Panel MSE refers to how well a model describes the realized asymmetric beta in a pooled 

context. Time Series MSE (TS) summarizes predictive performance as the cross -sectional average of 20 

performance for each firm  𝑖 . Cross Section MSE (CS) measures the cross -sectional predictive 

performance as in a Fama -MacBeth context. 

To examine the differences in the out -of -sample predictive accuracy between the conditional 

asymmetric beta estimator and the benchmark we use the Clark and West (CW, 2007) test for equal 

predictive accuracy. To compare the panel, time -series and cross -sec tional average of prediction errors 

between the forecasting model,  𝓂 , and the benchmark,  𝒷 , we use the following CW test statistics: 

𝐶𝑊 𝓂 ,𝒷 ,ℎ 

> 𝒬

= 𝑑 ̅𝓂 ,𝒷 

> 𝒬

𝜎 ̂𝓂 ,𝒷  

> 𝒬

, 𝒬 ∈ {Panel , TS , CS },

where  𝑑 ̅𝓂 ,𝒷  is the weighted average of the Clark –West error differences and  𝜎 ̂𝓂 ,𝒷  is the 

heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent (HAC) standard error using the Newey and West 

(1987) estimator with 4 lags. The CW adjusted term of squared error differences is defined as: 

𝑑 𝑖 ,𝑡 = (𝑒 ̂𝑖 ,𝑡  

> (𝓂 )

− 𝑒 ̂𝑖 ,𝑡  

> (𝒷 )

+ 𝑒 ̂𝑖 ,𝑡 

> (𝓂 ,𝒷 )

),

where  𝑒 ̂𝑖 ,𝑡  

> (𝓂 )

and  𝑒 ̂𝑖 ,𝑡  

> (𝒷 )

are the squared prediction errors for the conditional beta forecast and the 

benchmark respectively,  𝑒 ̂𝑖 ,𝑡  

> (𝓂 ,𝒷 )

is the squared difference between the conditional beta forecast and the 

benchmark. The weighted average  𝑑 ̅𝓂 ,𝒷  

> 𝒬

for each case is calculated as: 

𝑑 ̅𝓂 ,𝒷  

> Panel

= ∑ 𝑤 𝑗 𝑑 𝑗 

> 𝑁 𝑇 𝑂𝑂𝑆
> 𝑗 =1

,

𝑑 ̅ 𝓂 ,𝒷  

> TS

= ∑ 𝑤 𝑖 

1

𝑇 𝑖 𝑂𝑂𝑆 ∑ 𝑑 𝑖 ,𝑡 

> 𝑇 𝑖 𝑂𝑂𝑆
> 𝑡 =1
> 𝑁
> 𝑖 =1

,

𝑑 ̅𝓂 ,𝒷  

> CS

= 1

𝑇 𝑂𝑂𝑆 ∑ ∑ 𝑤 𝑖 ,𝑡 𝑑 𝑖 ,𝑡 

> 𝑁 𝑡
> 𝑖 =1
> 𝑇 𝑂𝑂𝑆
> 𝑡 =1

.

In each case, the HAC estimator is applied to the series that underlies the corresponding mean: pooled 

observations for the Panel case, aggregating at the firm level for the TS case, and at the month -level for 

the CS case. For the main results we report pr edictive performance for  𝑅 2 and the statistical significance 

based on the CW test statistics with equal weighting ( 𝑤 𝑗 = 1 𝑁 𝑇 𝑂𝑂𝑆 ⁄ , 𝑤 𝑖 = 1 𝑁 ⁄ , 𝑤 𝑖 ,𝑡 = 1 𝑁 𝑡 ⁄ ). 

[Insert Table 2 About Here] 21 

The results of the predictive performance evaluation of the asymmetric betas based on panel 

𝑅 2 are reported in Table 2.10  Several patterns emerge that remain consistent among different asymmetric 

betas and across forecasting horizons . All models deliver high and statistically significant out -of -sample 

𝑅 2 over the benchmark especially at short horizons , with predictive accuracy declin ing monotonically 

as the forecast horizon increases . In general , nonlinear models, exhibit the strongest predictive 

performance, with the gap in performance between linear and nonlinear methods widening for higher 

ℎ, which suggests that nonlinearities and interactions become increasingly important when forecasting 

beta at longer horizons . The combination of nonlinear models ( CNL ) yields the highest forecasting 

performance across the majority of beta measures and horizons. Among individual models, r andom 

forests (RF) consistently achieve s the highest  𝑅 2 across most asymmetric beta measures and horizons ,

with the predictive gains being particularly pronounced for downside and upside beta s and the 

concordant semibeta s.

Comparing across beta measures, d ownside and upside betas exhibit similar levels of 

predictability, with downside beta being marginally easier to forecast at longer horizons. Negative 

semibeta display s strong predictability that is comparable to downside beta. In contrast , predictive 

performance varies more between semibeta measures . Performance of positive semibeta remains strong 

at short horizons but deteriorates more quickly compared to negative semibeta as forecasting horizon 

increases . Furthermore, the positive semibeta is the only ca se where linear methods, such as the elastic 

net (EN) or the combination of linear models (CLIN), outperform the nonlinear models. The discordant 

semibetas present a greater forecasting challenge, with nonlinear machine learning models providing 

the most consistent gains for these risk measures , however, with generally smaller gains relative to the 

benchmark compared to the other asymmetric risk measures .

Specifically, f or the downside and upside betas and the concordant semibetas the results vary 

depending on the model and the risk measure being forecast , with  𝑅 2 values being typically in the range 

of 39 % to 46% for  ℎ = 1, between 31% and 39% for  ℎ = 3, from 19% to 32% for  ℎ = 6, and declining         

> 10 The results for the time series and cross section 𝑅 2are reported in Tables A 1and A 2in Appendix 1 and are
> consistent with those based on panel 𝑅 2.22

to the range of 10% to 25% for  ℎ = 12 . The mixed -sign semibetas based on negative (positive) market 

returns, exhibit  𝑅 2 values in the range of 42% to 44% (36% to 39%) for  ℎ = 1, from 26% to 33% (20% 

to 28%) for  ℎ = 3, from 9% to 20% ( -0.4% to 11%) for  ℎ = 6, and becoming negative for all models 

and asymmetric risk measures in the case of  ℎ = 12 . Overall, a ll instances of outperformance of the 

machine learning models from the benchmark are statistically significant at the 1% level, with 

ensembles of regression trees and nonlinear methods successfully capturing the dynamics of market 

asymmetries at longer horizons, which are more challenging to forecast .11 

The performance measures reported so far provide a static view of the predictive ability of the 

machine learning models. To examine a model’s performance over time, we construct equal -weighted 

portfolios of beta forecasts in each month and plot the cumulative difference of forecas t errors (CDFE) 

of the benchmark relative to the conditional beta forecasting models throughout the out -of -sample 

period for each asymmetric beta measure. The evolution of model performance is depicted in Figure s 2

to 5 for horizons  ℎ = 1, 3, 6, 12  months .

[Insert Figure s 2-5 About Here] 

Overall, Figure 2 highlights that short term ( ℎ = 1) conditional beta forecasts not only improve 

upon the benchmark on average but also generate persistent cumulative gains throughout the out -of -

sample period, with the CDFE of all models and across beta measures displaying a similar upward 

trend. For the 3- and 6 -month horizon s (Figure s 3 and 4) the differences in performance among models 

become more distinct, as forecasting further into the future becomes a more challenging task. T he CDFE 

pattern for downside and upside betas for  ℎ = 3, 6 remains similar to when  ℎ = 1, with forecasts based 

on RF and the CNL outperforming the remaining models , exhibiting a steeper slope after the global 

financial crisis. The performance over time for the concordant semibetas, indicates that the combination 

of nonlinear models and that of linear models yield the best predictive gains for the negative and positive              

> 11 The out -of -sample performance evaluation of asymmetric betas is based on equal -weighted measures. In
> unreported analysis, we examine the out -of -sample 𝑅 2and their significance according to the Clark -West test
> with weights based on the log of market capitalization. The results are qualitatively similar with the equal -
> weighted findings reported in Table 2, confirming that the predictive gains are not driven by small -cap stocks.
> These results are available upon request. 23

semibetas respectively, while for both discordant semibetas nonlinear models and their combination 

show clear signs of outperformance , particularly in the second half of the out -of -sample period .

For the 12 -month horizon ( Figure 5), t he dynamics for downside and upside betas are broadly 

consistent with the results of shorter -term horizons , with ensemble methods and the forecast 

combination of nonlinear models producing the strongest cumulative gains, especially in the aftermath 

of the global financial crisis. For the negative semibeta, RF and CNL are again the best performing 

model s, while for the positive semibeta, performance gains are flatter until the global financial crisis, 

after which RF, PLS, EN and the two forecast combinations steadily diverge from the remaining 

approaches. In contrast, the mixed sign semibetas remain particularly difficult to predict at a 12 -month 

horizon , with cumulative forecast error differences persistently negative across the sample, although an 

upward trend emerges from approximately 2013 onwards, driven primarily by nonlinear machine 

learning models .

After examining the predictive accuracy over time, we turn to the cross -sectional predictive 

ability of the models , by exploring the forecast errors of cross -sectional portfolio sorts. The goal of this 

analysis is to uncover the pattern of forecast errors of the stocks in the sample with regards to beta. At 

the end of each month  𝑡  stocks are sorted into quintile portfolios for each realized asymmetric beta. 

Portfolio betas are constructed as equal -weighted averages for the different models used to forecast beta 

and for the one -year ahead realized beta. Forecast errors are defined as the MSE between realized and 

forecast portfolio betas. To examine the direction of forecast errors, we calculate the fraction of stocks 

within each quintile portfolio for which the difference between realized and forecast betas is positive. 

A value above 0.5 would indicate that an alternative beta estimator on average under estimate s realized 

betas, while a value below 0.5 indicates that on average the forecast ove restimates realized beta. The 

results for cross -sectional performance of the forecast combinations of linear and nonlinear models for 

the asymmetric betas are presented in Figure s 7-9.12 

[Insert Figure s 7-9 About Here]       

> 12 The cross -sectional predictive performance of individual models is presented in Figures A1-A4in Appendix 1. 24

Focusing on the degree of over - or under -prediction a clear pattern emerges for all conditional 

estimators in that low -beta portfolios tend to be overpredicted, while high -beta portfolios are 

systematically underpredicted. This bias is monotonic , as overprediction diminishes across the lower 

quintiles , while underprediction increases steadily across the upper quintiles . This pattern persists across 

all asymmetric risk measures and forecasting horizons. More importantly, for 1 - and 3 -month horizons 

(Figures 6 and 7) conditional estimators consistently yield smaller errors than the benchmark for all 

quintile portfolios , suggesting that machine learning forecasts produce more stable estimates across the 

beta spectrum, mitigating the extreme biases observed in the benchmark in short -term forecasting 

horizons . For the downside and upside betas the highest errors are observed in the upper and lower 

quintiles, while for the semibetas the MSEs monotonically increase as portfolios are sorted on higher 

beta values. On the other hand, for longer forecasting horizons the pattern of the MSEs for downside 

and upside betas starts to resemble that of the semibetas. For the 6 -month horizon (Figure 8) the forecast 

combinations continue to outperform the benchmark model for the downside and upside betas and the 

concordant semibetas, however, at a lesser degree. For the discordant semibetas the difference in MSE 

becomes significantly smaller, with outperformance from the models arising from the upper quintile 

portfolios. The perfo rmance of the models diminishes further at a 12 -month horizon (Figure 9) with the 

alternative models outperforming the benchmark primarily in the middle quintile portfolios for the 

downside and upside betas and the discordant semibetas, while for the mixed -sign semibetas some 

evidence of outperformance is observed in the third and fourth quintile. 

## 4.2. Variable Importance of Asymmetric Betas 

To gain further insight into the drivers leading to the out performance found for the machine learning 

models we examine the variable importance of each of the six groups of predictors. The variable 

importance for each group is computed in each period according to the permutation feature importance 

and is defined as the change in equal -weighted panel MSE of the variables within that group. The 

aggregate measure of v ariable importance is constructed as the time series average throughout the out -25 

of -sample period for each group and then normalized across all groups to sum to 100 for each model. 

The variable importance for the asymmetric betas for a 1 -month horizon s presented in Figure 10 .13 

[Insert Figure 10 About Here] 

Across all asymmetric beta measures, variables from the trading frictions group stand out as 

the most influential predictors, confirming their central role in capturing time -variation in risk 

exposures. This pattern is more pronounced for linear models, where variable importance for this group 

of characteristics is above 90% for downside and upside betas and the concordant semibetas, and 

remains above 80% for discordant semibetas. For nonlinear models the importance of trading frictions 

remains significant, however, average variable importance is more dispersed across asymmetric risk 

measures . Specifically, gradient boosting (GB) select s predictors from the trading frictions group on 

average from 42% to 77%, random forests (RF) from 30% to 47% and the neural network (FFNN) from 

57% to 75% , depending on the asymmetric beta measure . The dispersion in variable importance is most 

evident for the discordant semibetas, where nonlinear models rely on a broader set of characteristics 

relative to other beta measures. In this case, random forests in particular draw on a more diversified 

predictor set. The additional ex planatory power comes primarily from variables in the intangibles group, 

and to a lesser extent from those in the momentum and value -versus -growth groups , suggesting that 

these asymmetric risk measures are driven by a richer set of firm -specific characteristics .14 

## 4.3. Evaluation of Reconstructed CAPM Beta 

Bollerslev et al. (2022) demonstrate that the regular market beta can be expressed as a weighted 

combination of downside and upside betas, with weights determined by the relative variance of negative 

and positive market returns: 

𝛽 𝑖 = 𝛽 𝑖  

> −

𝑉𝑎𝑟 (𝑟 𝑚 

> −

)

𝑉𝑎𝑟 (𝑟 𝑚 ) + 𝛽 𝑖  

> +

𝑉𝑎𝑟 (𝑟 𝑚 

> +

)

𝑉𝑎𝑟 (𝑟 𝑚 ), (22 )            

> 13 The variable importance for greater forecasting horizons exhibits similar patterns to that for ℎ=1and the
> results are reported in Figures A 5-A7in Appendix 1.
> 14 In unreported analysis, we examine whether the contribution of each predictor group to the predictive
> performance of the conditional beta models varies over time. The results indicate that the patterns observed on
> average persist throughout the out -of -sam ple period, with characteristics from the trading frictions group
> consistently dominating all other groups across beta measures, forecast horizons, and models. These results are
> available upon request. 26

or using the realized downside and upside betas estimated from daily returns, the regular beta can be 

reconstructed using the following function: 

𝛽 ̂𝑖 = 𝛽 ̂𝑖  

> −

∑ (𝑟 𝑚 

> −

)2

> 𝑡

∑ 𝑟 𝑚 

> 2
> 𝑡

+ 𝛽 ̂𝑖  

> +

∑ (𝑟 𝑚 

> +

)2

> 𝑡

∑ 𝑟 𝑚 

> 2
> 𝑡

. (23 )

Alternatively, regular market beta can be reconstructed as the sum of the four semibetas , which 

decompose the signed covariation between asset and market returns: 

𝛽 𝑖 = 𝐶𝑜𝑣 (𝑟 𝑖 −, 𝑟 𝑚 

> −

) + 𝐶𝑜𝑣 (𝑟 𝑖 +, 𝑟 𝑚 

> +

) + 𝐶𝑜𝑣 (𝑟 𝑖 +, 𝑟 𝑚 

> −

) + 𝐶𝑜𝑣 (𝑟 𝑖 −, 𝑟 𝑚 

> +

)

𝑉𝑎𝑟 (𝑟 𝑚 )

= 𝛽 𝑖 𝒩 + 𝛽 𝑖 𝒫 + 𝛽 𝑖 ℳ−

+ 𝛽 𝑖 ℳ+

(24 )

or the realized semibetas using the following function: 

𝛽 ̂𝑖 = 𝛽 ̂𝑖 𝒩 + 𝛽 ̂𝑖 𝒫 + 𝛽 ̂𝑖 ℳ−

+ 𝛽 ̂𝑖 ℳ+

. (25 )

Building on Bollerslev et al. (2022), who show that regular market beta can be reconstructed 

from asymmetric components, we evaluate the predictive accuracy of reconstructed CAPM beta 

forecasts relative to the historical beta benchmark. The CAPM beta is reconstructed under both 

approaches: first, as a weighted combination of downside and upside beta forecasts, and second, as the 

sum of semibeta forecasts. The reconstructed betas are assessed on average across forecasting horizons 

for the full sample, over t ime, and in the cross -section. Table 3 reports the out -of -sample performance 

of reconstructed CAPM beta forecasts based on panel  𝑅 2. 15 

[Insert Table 3 About Here] 

Overall, t he results show that combining forecasts from downside and upside betas or semibeta 

components yield statistically significant predictive gains, which indicates that a granular 

decomposition of systematic risk exposures provides a n accurate representation of CAPM beta 

dynamics. The results further demonstrate that machine learning models substantially enhance the 

forecasting accuracy of reconstructed CAPM beta s, with nonlinear models consistently providing the 

most robust gains , with their advantage over linear models becoming more pronounced at longer 

forecasting horizons . All models deliver high and stat istically significant out -of -sample  𝑅 2 at the one -       

> 15 The performance of conditional reconstructed CAPM betas according to the time series and cross section 𝑅 2
> remain consistent with those based on panel 𝑅 2and are reported in Tables A 3and A 4in Appendix 1. 27

month horizon, with values ranging from 34 to 39% across both reconstruction approaches. Predictive 

accuracy declines steadily as the forecasting horizon increases from 1 to 12 months , with  𝑅 2 decreas ing 

to the range of 20% -28% at the 3 -month horizon , to 9% -18% at six months and to 3% -13% at twelve 

months . Across specifications , t he performance of CAPM beta reconstructed from semibetas is similar 

to that based on downside and upside betas. Among individual models, random forests achieve s the 

highest  𝑅 2 values across both CAPM beta reconstruction approaches and all forecasting horizons .

Furthermore, the combination of nonlinear forecasting models (CNL) outperforms consistently the 

combination comprised of linear models (CLIN). 16 

To examine the performance of reconstructed CAPM beta over time , we form equal -weighted 

portfolios of beta forecasts in each month and plot the cumulative difference of forecast errors of the 

benchmark from the conditional beta estimators. Figure 11 presents the results for the linear and 

nonlinear forecast combinations across both CAPM specification s for horizons  ℎ = 1, 3, 6, 12  months .17 

[Insert Figure 11 About Here] 

Overall, t he results for performance over time complement the findings from Table 3 . Specifically, in 

that CAPM beta reconstructed from semibetas performs similar ly to that based on downside and upside 

betas , predictive gains diminish as the horizon window increases and that a forecast combination of 

nonlinear models (CNL) tends to outperform a combination of linear models (CLIN) . At the one -month 

horizon , the upward trend in cumulative performance indicates that conditional CAPM beta forecasts 

outperform the benchmark throughout the out -of -sample period. At the three -month horizon, the 

performance for both CNL and CLIN peaks during the dot -com bubble, after which CNL plateaus and 

CLIN declines until the global financial crisis , before both resum ing an upward trend that continues 

through the end of the sample. A similar pattern emerges at the six -month horizon, although periods of 

underperformance are more pronounced. At the twelve -month horizon , CLIN performance declines 

from the dot -com bubble up to the global financial crisis, remains relatively flat until 2013, before           

> 16 The out -of -sample performance evaluation of reconstructed CAPM betas is based on equal -weighted measures.
> In unreported analysis, we calculate value -weighted 𝑅 2and their significance , with weights based on the log of
> market capitalization. The results are qualitatively similar to those in Table 3, indicating that the predictive gains
> are not driven by small -cap stocks. These results are available upon request.
> 17 The performance of reconstructed CAPM betas for individual models based on cumulative differences of
> forecast errors is presented in Figures A 8-A11 in Appendix 1. 28

increasing until the end of the sample . I n contrast CNL , begins to exhibit sustained positive cumulative 

gains from the global financial crisis onward, highlighting its superior performance at longer horizons. 

The cross -sectional predictive performance of the models for reconstructed CAPM beta is 

evaluated by calculating forecast errors for quintile portfolios sorted on realized CAPM betas . Figure 

12 presents t he results for the linear and nonlinear forecast combinations across CAPM specifications 

and forecasting horizons .18 

[Insert Figure 12 About Here] 

Consistent with the findings for asymmetric betas, all conditional estimators display the characteristic 

pattern of overestimating low -beta portfolios and underestimating high -beta portfolios. However, t he 

magnitude of these errors is smaller relative to the benchmark for the first four quintiles , with the most 

pronounced gains in predictive accuracy observed for the portfolio based on stocks with the lowest 

betas . This suggests that the forecasting models are better at capturing variation among low - to med ium -

beta stocks, where betas may be more stable and easier to predict. Cross -sectional performance is similar 

when comparing CAPM beta reconstructed from downside and upside betas or from the four semibetas. 

The distribution of forecast errors also changes a cross forecasting horizons . A t short horizons errors are 

higher in both the lowest and highest beta quintiles , while at longer horizons errors become relatively 

flat across the first four quintiles but increase sharply for the highest -beta portfolio , again suggesting 

that high -beta stocks exhibit less predictable dynamics across horizons. 

## 4. 4. Equity Valuation and Discounted Cash Flow Analysis 

In an extensive survey of US CFOs regarding their practice on capital budgeting, cost of capital, and 

capital structure conducted by Graham and Harvey (2001) , the CAPM was found to be the most widely 

used approach to estimate cost of equity among 73.5% of the respondents. A more recent survey by 

Graham (2022) shows that 85% of the surveyed companies continue to rely on the CAPM to estimate 

their firm’s cost of equity. 

Given the enduring popularity of CAPM among corporate managers, we employ discounted 

cash flow models with discount rates based on conditional beta forecasts to evaluate the performance   

> 18 The cross -sectional performance of reconstructed CAPM betas for individual models based on forecast errors
> of quintile portfolios sorted on beta is presented in Figures A 12 -A15 in Appendix 1. 29

of alternative beta estimators in a share price prediction framework. Our analysis relates to Homel et al. 

(2023), who examine the performance of a wide range of discounting methods for deriving the value of 

a project, including discount rates based on fac tor models, and Augustin and Pukthuanthong (2025), 

who incorporate the term structure of betas in discounted cash flow analysis. Specifically, we estimate 

the price of firm  𝑖  and month  𝑡  as: 

𝑃𝑉 𝑖 ,𝑡  

> ℎ

= ∑ 𝐶 𝐹 𝑖 ,𝑗 

(1 + 𝑟 𝑖 ,𝑡  

> ℎ

)𝑖 

> 12
> 𝑗 =1

+ 1

(1 + 𝑟 𝑖 ,𝑡  

> ℎ

)12 × 𝐶 𝐹 𝑖 ,12 

𝑟 𝑖 ,𝑡  

> ℎ

− 𝑔 ,

(26 )

where  𝐶 𝐹 𝑖 ,𝑗  is the cash flow of firm  𝑖  in period  𝑗 , 𝑟 ℎ is the cost of equity and  𝑔  is the long -term growth 

rate. We consider a holding period of one year and a stream of 12 monthly cash flows. For each firm  𝑖 

at month  𝑡  we estimate the cost of equity using conditional reconstructed CAPM betas for horizon  ℎ as: 

𝑟 𝑖 ,𝑡  

> ℎ

= 𝑟 𝑓 + 𝛽 𝑖 ,𝑡  

> ℎ

× 𝑟 𝑚 . (27 )

As an alternative we derive the price of firm  𝑖  and month  𝑡  by using discount rates that vary according 

to the conditional beta horizon: 

𝑃 𝑉 𝑖 ,𝑡 = ∑ 𝐶 𝐹 𝑖 ,ℎ𝑗 

(1 + 𝑟 𝑖 ,𝑡  

> ℎ𝑗

)𝑖 

> 4
> 𝑗 =1

+ 1

(1 + 𝑟 𝑖 ,𝑡 

> 12

)12 × 𝐶 𝐹 𝑖 ,12 

𝑟 𝑖 ,𝑡  

> 12

− 𝑔 ,

(28 )

where  ℎ𝑗 = (1,3,6,12 ) for  𝑗 = 1, … 4, with cash flows for each period derived from monthly cash flows 

as:  𝐶 𝐹 1 = 𝐶 𝐹 1, 𝐶 𝐹 3 = 2 × 𝐶 𝐹 1, 𝐶 𝐹 6 = 3 × 𝐶 𝐹 1 and  𝐶 𝐹 12 = 6 × 𝐶 𝐹 1.

The analysis is performed on firms with positive monthly cash flows, with the cash flow of 

month  𝑗 , 𝐶 𝐹 𝑗 , calculated as the 12 -month rolling average of ordinary dividends obtained from CRSP .

Discount rates are estimated using a risk -free rate of zero and annual market risk premiums in the range 

of 8% to 12%, while terminal values are based on annual long -term growth rates from 0% to 2%. 

Predicted prices are compared to realized CRSP prices based on the out -of -sample panel  𝑅 2, with the 

corresponding historical CAPM beta set as the benchmark. Table 4 reports the results for observed price 

prediction based on intrinsic values derived from discounted cash flow models with cost of equity 

estimated using conditional betas from forecast combinations. 19  

> 19 Share price prediction performance of reconstructed CAPM betas for individual models is presented in Tables
> A5 -A9 in Appendix 1. 30

[Insert Table 4 About Here] 

Across Panels A -D, where intrinsic values are determined using horizon -specific betas, the out -

of -sample  𝑅 2 tends to decay as horizon increases. Short -term beta forecasts provide improved valuation 

results at low growth. For example, when  𝑔 = 0%  and  𝑟 𝑚 = 8%  the performance of CLIN based on 

semibetas starts at approximately 21% and declines to 2% at longer horizons. In contrast, at higher 

growth rates  𝑅 2 values are more stable across horizons. For example, when  𝑔 = 2%  and  𝑟 𝑚 = 8%  the 

performance of CNL based on semibetas has a range between 33% and 42%. Performance is stronger 

at lower market risk premiums, while higher premiums reduce predictive accuracy. For example,  𝑅 2

becomes negative at longer horizons when both growth is low and the market risk premium is high 

(𝑔 = 0% , 𝑟 𝑚 = 12% , and  ℎ = 12 ). Relative to the variation in performance induced by different long -

term growth rates, market risk premiums, and horizons, the differences in  𝑅 2 are smaller across forecast 

combination methods and CAPM beta specifications. 

Panel E reports the performance of the DCF models that account for the term structure of 

conditional betas. Combining betas across horizons leads to a substantial improvement in performance 

relative to using single -horizon forecasts. The predictive gains r elative to the benchmark are particularly 

pronounced at higher growth rates, where  𝑅 2 exceeds 60% when the discount rate is based on the 

semibeta decomposition and nonlinear forecast combinations. Short -horizon betas are individually 

informative, however, constructing cost of equity estimates by combining information across horizons 

leads to a significant boost in predictive performance, especially at higher growth rates, indicating that 

accounting for the term structure of betas is beneficial for equity valuation. 

## 4. 5. Market -Neutral Minimum -Variance Portfolios 

We have shown that when machine learning -based estimators of asymmetric beta components are used 

to reconstruct CAPM beta, they lead to statistically significant improvements i n predictive accuracy 

over the benchmark. In this section, we explore whether these gains benefit portfolio construction by 

evaluating the performance of optimal portfolios formed using the reconstructed CAPM beta forecasts. 

This setting is particularly rel evant for hedge fund managers implementing market -neutral strategies, 

where acc urate beta estimates are crucial for neutralizing the market risk of a portfolio. 31 

The accuracy of beta estimates becomes important to portfolio management when a factor 

structure is imposed on the covariance matrix of asset returns. A factor structure leads to more precise 

estimates of the covariance matrix when the asset universe is large due to the decrease in parameters 

that need to be estimated. Following Ghysels and Jacquier (200 6), Cosemans et al. (2016) and Drobetz 

et al. (2025), we construct market -neutral minimum -variance portfolios using covariance matrices 

based on exact factor models for each conditional beta estimator. 

The forecast of the covariance matrix of asset returns,  𝚺 𝑟 ,𝑡 +ℎ|𝑡 , implied by the single factor 

model using the different conditional beta estimates is: 

𝚺 𝑟 ,𝑡 +ℎ|𝑡 = 𝜎 𝑚 ,𝑡 +ℎ|𝑡  

> 2

𝛃 𝑡 +ℎ|𝑡 𝛃 𝑡 +ℎ|𝑡  

> ′

+ 𝚺 𝑒 ,𝑡 +ℎ|𝑡 , (29 )

where  𝛃 𝑡 +ℎ|𝑡  is the  𝑁 𝑡 × 1 vector of beta forecasts,  𝜎 𝑚 ,𝑡 +ℎ|𝑡  

> 2

is the estimate of the variance of the excess 

market return using data up to time  𝑡 , 𝚺 𝑒 ,𝑡 +ℎ|𝑡  is a diagonal matrix which contains the residual variances 

𝜎 𝑒 ,𝑖 ,𝑡 +ℎ|𝑡  

> 2

. Following Ghysels and Jacquier (2007), the residuals of stock  𝑖  are derived using the 

conditional beta estimates as  𝑒 ̂𝑖 ,𝑡 +ℎ = 𝑟 𝑖 ,𝑡 − 𝛽 ̂𝑖 ,𝑡 +ℎ𝑟 𝑚 ,𝑡 . Both market and idiosyncratic variances are 

estimated using in -sample daily data over a two -year rolling window. 

The forecasts of the factor -based covariance matrix are then used to construct market -neutral 

minimum variance portfolios, whose weights are obtained by solving the following optimization 

problem: 

argmin 

> 𝐰 𝑡 +ℎ

𝐰 𝑡 +ℎ 

> ′

𝚺 ̂𝑟 ,𝑡 +ℎ|𝑡 𝐰 𝑡 +ℎ,

s.t. ∑ 𝑤 𝑖 ,𝑡 +ℎ

> 𝑁 𝑡
> 𝑖 =1

= 1, ∑ 𝑤 𝑖 ,𝑡 +ℎ𝛽 ̂𝑖 ,𝑡 +ℎ|𝑡 

> 𝑁 𝑡
> 𝑖 =1

= 0, −0.3 ≤ 𝑤 𝑖 ,𝑡 +ℎ ≤ 0.3,

(30 )

the first constraint ensures full investment, the second enforces market neutrality, and the third imposes 

bounds on individual portfolio weights. 

We construct monthly portfolios using the 500 stocks with the highest market capitalization at 

each formation period. Given the short investment horizon typical of hedge fund strategies, portfolios 

are rebalanced monthly, and we derive the realized portfolio beta in the subsequent month. Following 

Augustin and Pukthuanthong (2025), performance is assesse d by comparing the distribution of ex -post 

realized portfolio betas across models. Specifically , we compare portfolios based on reconstructed 32 

CAPM betas that are derived from either downside and upside betas or the four semibetas to those based 

on the historical CAPM beta benchmark. Ideally, accurate beta forecasts should produce portfolio beta 

distributions centered around zero. Figures 13 to 1 6 present the distributions of realized portfolio betas 

for the benchmark model and for forecast combinations of linear and nonlinear models across different 

forecasting horizons. 20 

[Insert Figures 13 to 16 About Here] 

Market -neutral minimum -variance portfolios based on reconstructed CAPM betas generate ex -post 

portfolio betas that are tightly centered around zero. In contrast, portfolios formed using the historical 

CAPM beta estimator are not truly market neutral, as ref lected by the displacement of their beta 

distributions away from zero and consistently highly positive modes across all horizons. Specifically, 

the distribution of ex -post portfolio betas based on the historical estimator exhibits modes ranging from 

0.40 t o 0.66 at short horizons ( ℎ = 1,3) and declining to 0.26 -0.29 at longer horizons ( ℎ = 6,12 ). 

Turning to minimum -variance portfolios based on conditional estimators, the performance varies across 

horizons. At short horizons, portfolios based on CAPM betas reconstructed from semibetas using 

nonlinear forecast combinations (CNL) perform best, yiel ding modes closest to zero, with values 0.01 

at  ℎ = 1 and approximately zero at  ℎ = 3. At the six -month horizon, the best performance is achieved 

by portfolios based on CAPM beta reconstructed from downside and upside betas based on CNL 

forecasts, with a mode of 0.02. At the twelve -month horizon, performance converges across 

specifications and models, with modes ranging from −0.07 to 0.08. These results indicate that the 

reconstructed beta estimates lead to more accurate hedging of market risk, and that hedge fund managers 

would consistently benefit by incorporating beta forecasts based on firm -specific characteristics into 

the portfolio formation process. 

## 5. Conclusion 

This study investigates whether machine learning methods and firm -specific characteristics can 

improve the estimation of asymmetric betas across different horizons . Using a large cross -section of US   

> 20 Minimum -variance portfolio performance of reconstructed CAPM betas for individual models is presented in
> Figures A 16 -A19 in Appendix 1. 33

stocks over more than four decades, we evaluate the predictive performance of conditional downside 

and upside betas by Ang et al. (2006), as well as the four semibetas proposed by Bollerslev et al. (2022). 

Across a comprehensive set of models, we find that conditional asymmetric betas based on machine 

learning exhibit statistically significant predictive gains that translate to economically significant out -

of -sample benefits in equity valuation and for investors constructing market -neutral portfolios. 

Predictive performance is strongest at short horizons and declines monotonically as the 

forecasting horizon increases . Among asymmetric risk measures, the discordant semibetas are more 

challenging to predict than downside and upside betas or concordant semibetas . However, nonlinear 

machine learning models outperform other conditional estimators , with forecast combinations of 

nonlinear models or random forests providing the highest predictive accuracy across the majority of 

beta measures and horizons. Beyond model performance, our analysis shows that characteristics from 

the trading frictions group, which includes historical beta indicators , is the dominant set of predictors ,

followed by characteristics from intangibles, momentum and growth groups. 

These results extend to the reconstruction of the regular CAPM beta from asymmetric beta 

components. Forecast combinations of nonlinear models provid e stronger predictive gains compared to 

combinations of linear models , indicating that a more granular decomposition of systematic risk 

exposures provides a richer and more accurate representation of the CAPM beta dynamics. Estimating 

discount rates based on conditional betas lead to more accurate share price prediction relative to the 

benchmark, especially whe n estimating the cost of equity using beta forecasts across multiple horizons. 

Finally, m arket -neutral portfolios constructed using conditional betas produce ex -post betas tightly 

centered around zero, in contrast to those based on historical estimates that exhibit systematic deviations 

from market neutrality. The se findings highlight the value of combining machine learning with firm -

level signals to generate more accurate beta forecasts , improve valuation performance and to more 

effective ly hedg e market ri sk .34 

## References 

Andersen, T. G., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F. X., & Wu, G. (2006). Realized beta: Persistence and 

predictability. In Econometric Analysis of Financial and Economic Time Series . Emerald Group 

Publishing Limited. 

Ang, A., Chen, J., & Xing, Y. (2006). Downside risk. The Review of Financial Studies , 19(4), 1191 -

1239. 

Augustin, N., & Pukthuanthong, K. Forecasting the Term Structure of Equity Betas: Implications for 

Valuation. 

Bali, T. G., Engle, R. F., & Tang, Y. (2017). Dynamic conditional beta is alive and well in the cross 

section of daily stock returns. Management Science , 63(11), 3760 -3779. 

Bates, J. M., & Granger, C. W. (1969). The combination of forecasts. Journal of the Operational 

Research Society , 20(4), 451 -468. 

Bawa, V. S., & Lindenberg, E. B. (1977). Capital market equilibrium in a mean -lower partial moment 

framework. Journal of Financial Economics , 5(2), 189 -200. 

Becker, J., Hollstein, F., Prokopczuk, M., & Sibbertsen, P. (2021). The memory of beta. Journal of 

Banking & Finance , 124, 106026. 

Bollerslev, T., Li, J., Patton, A. J., & Quaedvlieg, R. (2020). Realized semicovariances. Econometrica: 

Journal of the Econometric Society , 88(4), 1515 -1551. 

Bollerslev, T., Patton, A. J., & Quaedvlieg, R. (2022). Realized semibetas: Disentangling “good” and 

“bad” downside risks. Journal of Financial Economics , 144(1), 227 -246. 

Breiman, L. (2001). Random forests. Machine Learning , 45(1), 5 -32. 

Buss, A., & Vilkov, G. (2012). Measuring equity risk with option -implied correlations. The Review of 

Financial Studies , 25(10), 3113 -3140. 

Campbell, J. Y., & Thompson, S. B. (2008). Predicting excess stock returns out of sample: Can anything 

beat the historical average? The Review of Financial Studies , 21(4), 1509 -1531. 

Campbell, J. Y., Lettau, M., Malkiel, B. G., & Xu, Y. (2001). Have individual stocks become more 

volatile? An empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk. The Journal of Finance , 56(1), 1 -43. 35 

Chang, B. Y., Christoffersen, P., Jacobs, K., & Vainberg, G. (2012). Option -implied measures of equity 

risk. Review of Finance , 16(2), 385 -428. 

Chen, A. Y., & Zimmermann, T. (2022). Open Source Cross -Sectional Asset Pricing. Critical Finance 

Review , 11(2), 207 -264. 

Clark, T. E., & West, K. D. (2007). Approximately normal tests for equal predictive accuracy in nested 

models. Journal of Econometrics , 138(1), 291 -311. 

Cosemans, M., Frehen, R., Schotman, P. C., & Bauer, R. (2016). Estimating security betas using prior 

information based on firm fundamentals. The Review of Financial Studies , 29(4), 1072 -1112. 

De Jong, S. (1993). SIMPLS: An alternative approach to partial least squares regression. Chemometrics 

and Intelligent Laboratory Systems , 18(3), 251 -263. 

Drobetz, W., Hollstein, F., Otto, T., & Prokopczuk, M. (2025). Estimating stock market betas via 

machine learning. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis , 60(3), 1074 -1110. 

Engle, R. F. (2016). Dynamic conditional beta. Journal of Financial Econometrics , 14(4), 643 -667. 

Engle, R. F., Ghysels, E., & Sohn, B. (2013). Stock market volatility and macroeconomic fundamentals. 

Review of Economics and Statistics , 95(3), 776 -797. 

Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (1992). The cross‐section of expected stock returns. The Journal of 

Finance , 47(2), 427 -465. 

Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (2008). Dissecting anomalies. The Journal of Finance , 63(4), 1653 -1678. 

Ferson, W. E., & Schadt, R. W. (1996). Measuring fund strategy and performance in changing economic 

conditions. The Journal of Finance , 51(2), 425 -461. 

Friedman, J. H. (2001). Greedy function approximation: a gradient boosting machine. Annals of 

Statistics , 1189 -1232. 

Ghysels, E., & Jacquier, E. (2006). Market beta dynamics and portfolio efficiency. Available at SSRN 

711942. 

Ghysels, E., Santa -Clara, P., & Valkanov, R. (2005). There is a risk -return trade -off after all. Journal of 

Financial Economics , 76(3), 509 -548. 

Gilbert, T., Hrdlicka, C., Kalodimos, J., & Siegel, S. (2014). Daily data is bad for beta: Opacity and 

frequency -dependent betas. The Review of Asset Pricing Studies , 4(1), 78 -117. 36 

Glorot, X., Bordes, A., & Bengio, Y. (2011). Deep sparse rectifier neural networks. In Proceedings of 

the fourteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics (pp. 315 -323). 

JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings. 

Graham, J. R. (2022). Presidential address: Corporate finance and reality. The Journal of Finance , 77(4), 

1975 -2049. 

Graham, J. R., & Harvey, C. R. (2001). The theory and practice of corporate finance: Evidence from 

the field. Journal of Financial Economics , 60(2 -3), 187 -243. 

Gu, S., Kelly, B., & Xiu, D. (2020). Empirical asset pricing via machine learning. The Review of 

Financial Studies , 33(5), 2223 -2273. 

Guo, H., Wu, C., & Yu, Y. (2017). Time -varying beta and the value premium. Journal of Financial and 

Quantitative Analysis , 52(4), 1551 -1576. 

Han, Y., He, A., Rapach, D. E., & Zhou, G. (2024). Cross -sectional expected returns: new Fama –

MacBeth regressions in the era of machine learning. Review of Finance , 28(6), 1807 -1831. 

Hollstein, F. (2020). Estimating beta: The international evidence. Journal of Banking & Finance , 121, 

105968. 

Hollstein, F., & Prokopczuk, M. (2016). Estimating beta. Journal of Financial and Quantitative 

Analysis , 51(4), 1437 -1466. 

Hollstein, F., Prokopczuk, M., & Simen, C. W. (2019). Estimating beta: Forecast adjustments and the 

impact of stock characteristics for a broad cross -section. Journal of Financial Markets , 44, 91 -

118. 

Hollstein, F., Prokopczuk, M., & Simen, C. W. (2020). The conditional capital asset pricing model 

revisited: Evidence from high -frequency betas. Management Science , 66(6), 2474 -2494. 

Hommel, N., Landier, A., & Thesmar, D. (2023). Corporate valuation: An empirical comparison of 

discounting methods (No. w30898). National Bureau of Economic Research .

Hou, K., Xue, C., & Zhang, L. (2020). Replicating Anomalies. The Review of Financial Studies , 33(5), 

2019 -2133. 

Ioffe, S., & Szegedy, C. (2015). Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing 

internal covariate shift. In International conference on machine learning (pp. 448 -456). 37 

Jagannathan, R., & Wang, Z. (1996). The conditional CAPM and the cross‐section of expected returns. 

The Journal of Finance , 51(1), 3 -53. 

Kelly, B. T., Moskowitz, T. J., & Pruitt, S. (2021). Understanding momentum and reversal. Journal of 

Financial Economics , 140(3), 726 -743. 

Kim, S., Korajczyk, R. A., & Neuhierl, A. (2021). Arbitrage portfolios. The Review of Financial Studies ,

34(6), 2813 -2856. 

Kingma, D. P., & Ba, J. (2014). Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint 

arXiv:1412.6980 .

Lettau, M., & Ludvigson, S. (2001). Consumption, aggregate wealth, and expected stock returns. The 

Journal of Finance , 56(3), 815 -849. 

Lettau, M., Maggiori, M., & Weber, M. (2014). Conditional risk premia in currency markets and other 

asset classes. Journal of Financial Economics , 114(2), 197 -225. 

Levi, Y., & Welch, I. (2017). Best practice for cost -of -capital estimates. Journal of Financial and 

Quantitative Analysis , 52(2), 427 -463. 

Levi, Y., & Welch, I. (2020). Symmetric and asymmetric market betas and downside risk. The Review 

of Financial Studies , 33(6), 2772 -2795. 

Lewellen, J. (2015). The Cross -section of Expected Stock Returns. Critical Finance Review , 4(1), 1 -

44. 

Lewellen, J., & Nagel, S. (2006). The conditional CAPM does not explain asset -pricing anomalies. 

Journal of Financial Economics , 82(2), 289 -314. 

Lintner, J. (1965). Security prices, risk, and maximal gains from diversification. The Journal of Finance ,

20(4), 587 -615. 

Markowitz, H. M. (1959). Portfolio selection: efficient diversification of investments . New York, New 

York: Wiley. 

Mossin, J. (1966). Equilibrium in a capital asset market. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric 

Society , 768 -783. 

Newey, W. K., & West, K. D. (1987). A Simple, Positive Semi -Definite, Heteroskedasticity and 

Autocorrelation. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society , 55(3), 703 -708. 38 

Rapach, D. E., Strauss, J. K., & Zhou, G. (2010). Out -of -sample equity premium prediction: 

Combination forecasts and links to the real economy. The Review of Financial Studies , 23(2), 

821 -862. 

Roy, A. D. (1952). Safety first and the holding of assets. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric 

Society , 431 -449. 

Shanken, J. (1990). Intertemporal asset pricing: An empirical investigation. Journal of Econometrics ,

45(1 -2), 99 -120. 

Sharpe, W. F. (1964). Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of risk. The 

Journal of Finance , 19(3), 425 -442. 

Srivastava, N., Hinton, G., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., & Salakhutdinov, R. (2014). Dropout: a simple 

way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. The Journal of Machine Learning Research ,

15(1), 1929 -1958. 

Welch, I., & Goyal, A. (2008). A comprehensive look at the empirical performance of equity premium 

prediction. The Review of Financial Studies , 21(4), 1455 -1508. 

Zou, H., & Hastie, T. (2005). Regularization and variable selection via the elastic net. Journal of the 

Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) , 67(2), 301 -320. 39 

## Tables and Figures 

Table 1 Descriptive Statistics of Asymmetric Betas for Different Estimation Windows .

This table reports the time series averages of the cross -sectional means, medians, standard deviations and correlations for the monthly 

realized asymmetric betas across four different estimation windows ( ℎ = 1, 3, 6, 12  months ) constructed using daily returns. The 

asymmetric risk measures are t he downside and upside betas ( 𝛽 −, 𝛽 +), the concordant semibetas ( 𝛽 𝒩 , 𝛽 𝒫 ), and the discordant semibetas 

(𝛽 ℳ−

, 𝛽 ℳ+

). The sample period is from January 1980 to December 2024. 

1-month estimation window  3-month estimation window 

𝛽 − 𝛽 + 𝛽 𝒩  𝛽 𝒫  𝛽 ℳ−

𝛽 ℳ+ 𝛽 − 𝛽 + 𝛽 𝒩  𝛽 𝒫  𝛽 ℳ−

𝛽 ℳ+

Mean  0.95  0.98  0.58  0.73  0.15  0.19  0.96  0.98  0.60  0.68  0.13  0.17 

Median  0.88  0.90  0.52  0.65  0.10  0.14  0.90  0.91  0.55  0.63  0.11  0.14 

St .Dev . 1.04  0.91  0.35  0.42  0.17  0.20  0.62  0.61  0.27  0.30  0.11  0.13 

Correlations  Correlations 

𝛽 − 1 0.32  0.89  0.35  -0.51  -0.01  1 0.56  0.92  0.60  -0.34  0.01 

𝛽 + 0.32  1 0.35  0.90  -0.05  -0.46  0.56  1 0.58  0.92  -0.06  -0.31 

𝛽 𝒩  0.89  0.35  1 0.44  -0.09  0.10  0.92  0.58  1 0.68  0.03  0.16 

𝛽 𝒫  0.35  0.90  0.44  1 0.05  -0.06  0.60  0.92  0.68  1 0.10  0.07 

𝛽 ℳ−

-0.51  -0.05  -0.09  0.05  1 0.21  -0.34  -0.06  0.03  0.10  1 0.38 

𝛽 ℳ+ -0.01  -0.46  0.10  -0.06  0.21  1 0.01  -0.31  0.16  0.07  0.38  1

6-month estimation window  12 -month estimation window 

𝛽 − 𝛽 + 𝛽 𝒩  𝛽 𝒫  𝛽 ℳ−

𝛽 ℳ+ 𝛽 − 𝛽 + 𝛽 𝒩  𝛽 𝒫  𝛽 ℳ−

𝛽 ℳ+

Mean  0.96  0.98  0.60  0.66  0.13  0.16  0.96  0.99  0.60  0.65  0.13  0.15 

Median  0.91  0.92  0.56  0.62  0.11  0.14  0.91  0.92  0.57  0.61  0.11  0.14 

St .Dev . 0.52  0.52  0.25  0.27  0.08  0.10  0.46  0.48  0.23  0.25  0.07  0.08 

Correlations  Correlations 

𝛽 − 1 0.71  0.94  0.73  -0.22  0.03  1 0.82  0.95  0.81  -0.11  0.06 

𝛽 + 0.71  1 0.71  0.93  -0.04  -0.20  0.82  1 0.80  0.94  0.00  -0.09 

𝛽 𝒩  0.94  0.71  1 0.80  0.11  0.21  0.95  0.80  1 0.87  0.19  0.26 

𝛽 𝒫  0.73  0.93  0.80  1 0.15  0.16  0.81  0.94  0.87  1 0.22  0.23 

𝛽 ℳ−

-0.22  -0.04  0.11  0.15  1 0.52  -0.11  0.00  0.19  0.22  1 0.67 

𝛽 ℳ+ 0.03  -0.20  0.21  0.16  0.52  1 0.06  -0.09  0.26  0.23  0.67  140 

Table 2 Predictive Panel Performance of Asymmetric Betas Across Forecasting Horizons. 

This table reports the out -of -sample  𝑅 2 of the alternative prediction models across horizons ( ℎ = 1, 3, 6, 12  months ). 

The forecasting performance is evaluated using the panel  𝑅 2 calculated using equal weighting. The benchmark is the  ℎ-

lagged realized beta measure for the respective asymmetric beta. The conditional beta forecasts are based on principal 

component analysis (pca), partial least squares (pls), elastic net (en), random forests (rf), gradient boosting (gb) and 

feed -forward ne ural network (ffnn). Performance is also reported for the equally weighted forecast combinations of the 

three linear models (clin) and the three non -linear models (cnl). This table also reports the statistical significance of the 

forecasts according to the Clark and West (2007) test for equal predictive accuracy. The statistical significance of the 

alternative beta estimators from the benchmark is denoted by: *, **, and *** for significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% 

level, respectively. The out -of -sample perio d is from January 1990 to December 2024. 

Downside Beta  Upside Beta 

ℎ = 1 ℎ = 3 ℎ = 6 ℎ = 12  ℎ = 1 ℎ = 3 ℎ = 6 ℎ = 12 

pca  45.15***  35.74***  27.32***  17.59***  pca  43.45***  32.19***  19.84***  10.68*** 

pls  45.84***  37.04***  29.31***  19.89***  pls  44.63***  34.14***  22.29***  13.82*** 

en  45.89***  37.19***  29.49***  20.62***  en  44.65***  34.11***  22.83***  14.81*** 

clin  45.87***  37.21***  29.50***  20.63***  clin  44.62***  34.20***  22.67***  14.63*** 

gb  45.82***  37.56***  30.13***  21.02***  gb  44.75***  35.53***  23.51***  14.75*** 

rf  45.96***  38.85***  32.66***  24.51***  rf  45.00***  36.43***  25.95***  18.65*** 

ffnn  46.00***  37.29***  29.38***  19.58***  ffnn  44.88***  34.32***  22.31***  13.42*** 

cnl  46.35***  39.06***  32.38***  24.15***  cnl  45.39***  36.68***  25.71***  18.35*** 

Semibeta - Negative  Semibeta - Positive 

ℎ = 1 ℎ = 3 ℎ = 6 ℎ = 12  ℎ = 1 ℎ = 3 ℎ = 6 ℎ = 12 

pca  45.10***  35.07***  25.57***  17.70***  pca  42.24***  37.17***  25.09***  23.22*** 

pls  46.12***  36.41***  27.14***  19.00***  pls  43.29***  38.45***  26.51***  24.32*** 

en  46.18***  36.72***  27.55***  20.01***  en  43.07***  38.51***  26.07***  24.65*** 

clin  46.14***  36.66***  27.55***  20.11***  clin  43.18***  38.54***  26.66***  25.26*** 

gb  43.83***  33.94***  27.90***  22.68***  gb  39.12***  31.08***  19.25***  16.16*** 

rf  45.67***  37.01***  30.41***  25.09***  rf  41.29***  36.20***  24.11***  24.49*** 

ffnn  46.29***  36.63***  27.05***  18.79***  ffnn  43.47***  38.16***  23.41***  18.02*** 

cnl  46.05***  37.79***  30.79***  25.28***  cnl  42.55***  37.05***  24.79***  23.34*** 

Semibeta - Mixed Sign, Negative Market Return  Semibeta - Mixed Sign, Positive Market Return 

ℎ = 1 ℎ = 3 ℎ = 6 ℎ = 12  ℎ = 1 ℎ = 3 ℎ = 6 ℎ = 12 

pca  42.86***  26.01***  9.79***  -15.08***  pca  36.26***  20.69***  -0.43***  -18.55*** 

pls  44.15***  29.09***  13.84***  -9.79***  pls  37.54***  23.75***  4.07***  -13.09*** 

en  44.21***  29.40***  14.06***  -9.84***  en  37.58***  23.64***  3.45***  -14.34*** 

clin  44.11***  28.99***  13.96***  -9.75***  clin  37.48***  23.59***  3.78***  -13.64*** 

gb  42.18***  31.98***  17.85***  -5.26***  gb  38.02***  23.58***  8.92***  -8.46*** 

rf  44.84***  32.87***  18.25***  -3.69***  rf  38.96***  28.31***  8.50***  -5.21*** 

ffnn  44.64***  30.21***  19.07***  -6.90***  ffnn  38.05***  26.31***  7.52***  -10.30*** 

cnl  44.86***  33.32***  20.48***  -1.33***  cnl  39.65***  28.49***  11.29***  -3.59*** 41 

Table 3 Predictive Panel Performance of Reconstructed CAPM Betas Across Forecasting Horizons. 

This table reports the out -of -sample  𝑅 2 of the alternative prediction models across horizons ( ℎ = 1, 3, 6, 12  months ). 

The forecasting performance is evaluated using the panel  𝑅 2 calculated using equal weighting. The benchmark is the 

ℎ-lagged realized CAPM beta. The conditional beta forecasts are based on principal component analysis (pca), partial 

least squares (pls), elastic net (en), random forests (rf), gradient boosting (gb) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn). 

Performance is al so reported for the equally weighted forecast combinations of the three linear models (clin) and the 

three non -linear models (cnl). Estimates of CAPM beta are derived as a combination of forecasts of downside and 

upside betas, and as a combination of forecasts of four semibetas . This table also reports the statistical significance of 

the forecasts according to the Clark and West (2007) test for equal predictive accuracy. The statistical significance of 

the alternative beta estimators from the benchmark is denoted by: *, **, and ** * for significance at the 10%, 5%, and 

1% level, respectively. The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to December 2024. 

CAPM Beta (Downside and Upside Betas) 

ℎ = 1 ℎ = 3 ℎ = 6 ℎ = 12 

pca  35.13***  20.99***  9.30***  3.13*** 

pls  37.22***  23.99***  12.85***  6.66*** 

en  37.32***  24.07***  13.21***  7.81*** 

clin  37.19***  23.98***  13.01***  7.52*** 

gb  37.81***  26.44***  15.43***  9.96*** 

rf  38.04***  27.80***  18.33***  13.03*** 

ffnn  37.70***  24.56***  13.27***  6.73*** 

cnl  38.73***  28.01***  17.82***  12.67*** 

CAPM Beta (Semibetas) 

ℎ = 1 ℎ = 3 ℎ = 6 ℎ = 12 

pca  35.36***  20.89***  9.71***  3.31*** 

pls  37.63***  24.14***  13.04***  6.61*** 

en  37.56***  24.63***  13.29***  8.08*** 

clin  37.47***  24.17***  13.35***  7.81*** 

gb  34.56***  23.55***  16.32***  9.84*** 

rf  36.89***  26.36***  16.99***  12.50*** 

ffnn  37.78***  24.33***  12.01***  4.14*** 

cnl  37.67***  26.95***  17.78***  12.45*** 42 

Table 4 Share Price Prediction for Forecast Combinations. 

This table reports the out -of -sample panel  𝑅 2 for observed prices compared to intrinsic values derived from discounted cash 

flow models with alternative discount rates. Intrinsic values are calculated using a one -year holding period with monthly 

cash flows based on 12 -month rolling averages of ordina ry dividends. Terminal values assume annual long -term growth 

rates from 0% to 2%. Conditional betas are converted to discount rates using a risk -free rate of zero and market risk 

premiums from 8% to 12%. Panels A -D report the results for horizon -specific c onditional betas ( ℎ = 1,3,6,12 ), while Panel 

E for conditional betas across horizons. The benchmark is the respective  ℎ-lagged realized CAPM beta. The conditional 

beta forecasts are based on equally weighted forecast combinations of the three linear models (clin) and the three non -linear 

models (cnl). Estimates of CAPM beta are derived as a combination of forecasts of down side and upside betas, and as a 

combination of forecasts of four semibetas. The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to December 2024. 

Growth Rate  0%  1%  2% 

Market Premium  8%  10%  12%  8%  10%  12%  8%  10%  12% 

A. 1 -month horizon betas 

clin (Downside and Upside Betas)  20.53  11.76  6.74  31.75  19.93  11.45  20.80  23.97  15.34 

cnl (Downside and Upside Betas)  20.78  11.74  6.58  34.58  20.88  11.80  18.11  26.91  17.20 

clin (Semibetas)  20.98  12.05  6.94  33.68  20.78  12.01  25.32  26.20  16.49 

cnl (Semibetas)  19.98  10.86  5.72  34.79  20.29  10.97  37.82  28.22  17.30 

B. 3 -month horizon betas 

clin (Downside and Upside Betas)  14.33  7.46  3.78  32.89  17.73  10.18  32.63  27.37  16.20 

cnl (Downside and Upside Betas)  14.46  7.44  3.69  34.55  18.42  10.42  25.55  29.34  17.30 

clin (Semibetas)  14.46  7.54  3.83  33.68  18.15  10.39  32.60  27.96  16.69 

cnl (Semibetas)  13.83  6.79  3.07  34.46  17.87  9.77  33.53  30.22  16.97 

C. 6 -month horizon betas 

clin (Downside and Upside Betas)  6.97  2.89  0.89  27.77  14.02  7.08  38.44  33.41  15.74 

cnl (Downside and Upside Betas)  6.78  2.63  0.61  28.67  14.22  6.98  34.40  33.01  15.95 

clin (Semibetas)  7.03  2.93  0.92  27.97  14.17  7.15  37.79  33.21  15.93 

cnl (Semibetas)  6.54  2.36  0.36  28.73  14.00  6.70  36.21  34.98  16.41 

D. 12 -month horizon betas 

clin (Downside and Upside Betas)  1.98  0.02  -0.82  23.73  11.28  5.06  40.02  29.83  15.94 

cnl (Downside and Upside Betas)  1.84  -0.19  -1.04  24.49  11.39  4.96  40.48  30.29  16.31 

clin (Semibetas)  2.03  0.04  -0.82  23.96  11.35  5.09  39.30  29.78  16.03 

cnl (Semibetas)  1.64  -0.39  -1.24  24.53  11.23  4.76  41.93  30.83  16.34 

E. Betas across horizons 

clin (Downside and Upside Betas)  5.46  2.37  0.87  35.33  18.50  10.18  60.66  48.26  28.06 

cnl (Downside and Upside Betas)  5.32  2.16  0.65  35.98  18.60  10.08  62.03  48.53  28.41 

clin (Semibetas)  5.50  2.39  0.88  35.53  18.57  10.21  60.41  48.33  28.15 

cnl (Semibetas)  5.13  1.96  0.46  36.01  18.46  9.89  63.26  49.21  28.43 43 

Figure 1 Unconditional Distributions of Asymmetric Betas for Different Estimation Windows .

This figure displays the kernel density estimates of the unconditional distribution of the monthly realized asymmetric 

beta s across four different estimation windows ( ℎ = 1, 3, 6, 12  months ) constructed using daily returns. The sample 

period is from January 1980 to December 2024. 44 

Figure 2 Cumulative Difference of Forecast Errors Over Time : 1 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the cumulative differences in squared forecast errors for the benchmark relative to the 

conditional beta forecasting models for  ℎ = 1. The benchmark is the  ℎ-lagged realized beta measure for the 

respective asymmetric beta. The conditional beta forecasts are based on principal component analysis (pca), partial 

least squares (pls), elastic net (en), random forests (rf), gradient boosting (gb) and feed -forward neural network 

(ffnn). Performance is also reported for the equally weighted forecast combinations of the three linear models (clin) 

and the three non -linear models (cnl). The shaded regions depict NBER -dated recessions. Higher values indicate 

improved predictive performance from the benchmark. The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to December 

2024. 45 

Figure 3 Cumulative Difference of Forecast Errors Over Time : 3 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the cumulative differences in squared forecast errors for the benchmark relative to the 

conditional beta forecasting models for  ℎ = 3. The benchmark is the  ℎ-lagged realized beta measure for the 

respective asymmetric beta. The conditional beta forecasts are based on principal component analysis (pca), 

partial least squares (pls), elastic net (en), random forests (rf), gradient boosting (gb) and feed -forward neural 

network (ffnn). Performance is also reported for the equally weighted forecast combinations of the three linear 

models (clin) and the three non -linear models (cnl). The shaded regions depict NBER -dated recessions. Higher 

values indicate improved predictive performance from the benchmark. The out -of -sample period is from January 

1990 to December 2024. 46 

Figure 4 Cumulative Difference of Forecast Errors Over Time : 6 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the cumulative differences in squared forecast errors for the benchmark relative to the 

conditional beta forecasting models for  ℎ = 6. The benchmark is the  ℎ-lagged realized beta measure for the 

respective asymmetric beta. The conditional beta forecasts are based on principal component analysis (pca), partial 

least squares (pls), elastic net (en), random forests (rf), gradient boosting (gb) and feed -forward neural network 

(ffnn). Performance is also reported for the equally weighted forecast combinations of the three linear models 

(clin) and the three non -linear models (cnl). The shaded regions depict NBER -dated recessions. Higher values 

indicate improved predictive performance from the benchmark. The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 

to December 2024. 47 

Figure 5 Cumulative Difference of Forecast Errors Over Time : 12 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the cumulative differences in squared forecast errors for the benchmark relative to the 

conditional beta forecasting models for  ℎ = 12 . The benchmark is the  ℎ-lagged realized beta measure for the 

respective asymmetric beta. The conditional beta forecasts are based on principal component analysis (pca), partial 

least squares (pls), elastic net (en), random forests (rf), gradient boosting (gb) and feed -forward neural network 

(ffnn). Performance is also reported for the equally weighted forecast combinations of the three linear models (clin) 

and the three non -linear models (cnl). The shaded regions depict NBER -dated recessions. Higher values indicate 

improved predictive performance from the benchmark. The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to 

December 2024. 48 

Figure 6 Average Predictive Performance of Quintile Portfolios for Forecast Combinations: 1 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the time series averages of monthly mean squared errors (MSE) for quintile portfolios for  ℎ =

1. Portfolios are formed monthly by sorting stocks into quintiles according to realised beta values (1 -low beta, 5-

high beta). The equally weighted MSE is constructed for each quintile , for the benchmark (red bars) and the 

conditional beta forecasts (blue bars). The figure also reports the fraction of stocks within each portfolio for which 

the difference between realized and forecast portfolio betas is positive (dots, right -hand axis). The benchmark is the 

ℎ-lagged realized beta measure for the respective asymmetric beta. The conditional beta forecasts are based on the 

equally weighted forecast combinations of the linear models (clin) and the non -linear mo dels (cnl). The out -of -

sample period is from January 1990 to December 2024. 49 

Figure 7 Average Predictive Performance of Quintile Portfolios for Forecast Combinations: 3 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the time series averages of monthly mean squared errors (MSE) for quintile portfolios for  ℎ =

3. Portfolios are formed monthly by sorting stocks into quintiles according to realised beta values (1 -low beta, 5-

high beta). The equally weighted MSE is constructed for each quintile , for the benchmark (red bars) and the 

conditional beta forecasts (blue bars). The figure also reports the fraction of stocks within each portfolio for which 

the difference between realized and forecast portfolio betas is positive (dots, right -hand axis). The benchmark is 

the  ℎ-lagged realized beta measure for the respective a symmetric beta. The conditional beta forecasts are based 

on the equally weighted forecast combinations of the linear models (clin) and the non -linear models ( cnl). The 

out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to December 2024. 50 

Figure 8 Average Predictive Performance of Quintile Portfolios for Forecast Combinations: 6 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the time series averages of monthly mean squared errors (MSE) for quintile portfolios for  ℎ =

6. Portfolios are formed monthly by sorting stocks into quintiles according to realised beta values (1 -low beta, 5-

high beta). The equally weighted MSE is constructed for each quintile , for the benchmark (red bars) and the 

conditional beta forecasts (blue bars). The figure also reports the fraction of stocks within each portfolio for which 

the difference between realized and forecast portfolio betas is positive (dots, right -hand axis). The benchmark is 

the  ℎ-lagged realized beta measure for the respective asymmetric beta. The conditional beta forecasts are based 

on the equally weighted forecast combinations of the linear models (clin) and the non -linear mo dels (cnl). The 

out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to December 2024. 51 

Figure 9 Average Predictive Performance of Quintile Portfolios for Forecast Combinations: 12 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the time series averages of monthly mean squared errors (MSE) for quintile portfolios for  ℎ =

12 . Portfolios are formed monthly by sorting stocks into quintiles according to realised beta values (1 -low beta, 5-

high beta). The equally weighted MSE is constructed for each quintile , for the benchmark (red bars) and the 

conditional beta forecasts (blue bars). The figure also reports the fraction of stocks within each portfolio for which 

the difference between realized and forecast portfolio betas is positive (dots, right -hand axis). The benchmark is the 

ℎ-lagged realized beta measure for the respective asymmetric beta. The conditional beta forecasts are based on the 

equally weighted forecast combinations of the linear models (clin) and the non -linear models ( cnl). The out -of -

sample period is from January 1990 to December 2024. 52 

Figure 10 Average Variable Importance : 1 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the variable importance for each of the six groups of predictors. The variable importance in 

each period is computed according to the permutation feature importance. Variable importance is averaged 

throughout the out -of -sample period and is normalized for each model to sum to 100 (darker colours indicate greater 

variable importance) . The conditional beta forecasts are based on principal component analysis ( pca ), partial least 

squares ( pls ), elastic net (en ), random forests (rf ), gradient boosting (gb ) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn ). 

The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to December 2024. 53 

Figure 1 1 Cumulative Difference of Forecast Errors Over Time of CAPM Beta for Forecast Combinations. 

This figure displays the cumulative differences in squared forecast errors of CAPM beta for the benchmark relative 

to the conditional beta forecasting models across horizons . The benchmark is the  ℎ-lagged realized CAPM beta. The 

conditional beta forecasts are based on equally weighted forecast combinations of the linear models (clin) and the 

non -linear models (cnl). Estimates of CAPM beta are derived as a combination of forecasts of downside and upside 

betas (green line), and as a combination of forecasts of four semibetas (blue line). The shaded regions depict NBER -

dated recessions. Higher values indicate improved predictive performance from the benchmark. The out -of -sample 

period is from January 1990 to December 2024. 54 

Figure 1 2 Average Predictive Performance of Quintile Portfolios of CAPM Beta for Forecast Combinations. 

This figure displays the time series averages of monthly mean squared errors (MSE) for quintile portfolios across horizons .

Portfolios are formed monthly by sorting stocks into quintiles according to realised beta values (1 -low beta, 5-high beta). The 

equally weighted MSE is constructed for each quintile , for the benchmark (red bars) and the conditional beta forecasts (blue 

bars). The figure also reports the fraction of stocks within each portfolio for which the difference between realized and forecast 

portfolio betas is positive (dots, right -hand axis). The benchmark is the  ℎ-lagged realized CAPM beta. The conditional beta 

forecasts are based on the equally weighted forecast combinations of the linear models (clin) and the non -linear models (cnl). 

Estimates of CAPM beta are derived as a combination of forecasts of downside and upside betas, and as a combination of 

forecasts of four semibetas. The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to December 2024. 55 

Figure 1 3 Market -Neutral Minimum -Variance Portfolio: 1 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the distribution of monthly ex -post realized betas for market -neutral minimum -variance 

portfolios for  ℎ = 1. Portfolios are constructed based on the  ℎ-lagged historical CAPM beta benchmark (grey), 

and conditional CAPM beta s reconstructed from forecasts of downside and upside betas (green), and from forecasts 

of the four semibetas (blue). Dashed vertical lines and annotations indicate the modes of each distribution. The 

conditional asymmetric beta forecasts are based on equally weighted forecast combinations of the linear models 

(clin) and the non -linear models (cnl). The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to December 2024. 

Figure 1 4 Market -Neutral Minimum -Variance Portfolio: 3 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the distribution of monthly ex -post realized betas for market -neutral minimum -variance 

portfolios for  ℎ = 3. Portfolios are constructed based on the  ℎ-lagged historical CAPM beta benchmark (grey), 

and conditional CAPM beta s reconstructed from forecasts of downside and upside betas (green), and from 

forecasts of the four semibetas (blue). Dashed vertical lines and annotations indicate the modes of each distribution. 

The conditional asymmetric beta forecasts are based on equally weighted forecast combinations of the linear 

models (clin) and the non -linear models (cnl). The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to December 2024. 56 

Figure 1 5 Market -Neutral Minimum -Variance Portfolio: 6 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the distribution of monthly ex -post realized betas for market -neutral minimum -variance 

portfolios for  ℎ = 6. Portfolios are constructed based on the  ℎ-lagged historical CAPM beta benchmark (grey), 

and conditional CAPM beta s reconstructed from forecasts of downside and upside betas (green), and from 

forecasts of the four semibetas (blue). Dashed vertical lines and annotations indicate the modes of each distribution. 

The conditional asymmetric beta forecasts are based on equally weighted forecast combinations of the linear 

models (clin) and the non -linear models (cnl). The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to December 2024. 

Figure 1 6 Market -Neutral Minimum -Variance Portfolio: 12 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the distribution of monthly ex -post realized betas for market -neutral minimum -variance 

portfolios for  ℎ = 12 . Portfolios are constructed based on the  ℎ-lagged historical CAPM beta benchmark (grey), 

and conditional CAPM beta s reconstructed from forecasts of downside and upside betas (green), and from forecasts 

of the four semibetas (blue). Dashed vertical lines and annotations indicate the modes of each distribution. The 

conditional asymmetric beta forecasts are based on equally weighted forecast combinations of the linear models 

(clin) and the non -linear models (cnl). The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to December 2024. 57 

## Appendix 1: Supplementary Tables and Figures 

Table A1 Predictive Time Series Performance of Asymmetric Betas Across Forecasting Horizons. 

This table reports the out -of -sample  𝑅 2 of the alternative prediction models across horizons ( ℎ = 1, 3, 6, 12  months ). 

The forecasting performance is evaluated using the time -series (TS)  𝑅 2 calculated as the average of firm -level time -

series errors. The benchmark is the  ℎ-lagged realized beta measure for the respective asymmetric beta. The conditional 

beta forecasts are based on principal component analysis (pca), partial least squares (pls), elastic net (en), random forests 

(rf), gradient boosting (gb) and feed -forward ne ural network (ffnn). Performance is also reported for the equally 

weighted forecast combinations of the three linear models (clin) and the three non -linear models (cnl). This table also 

reports the statistical significance of the forecasts according to the Clark and West (2007) test for equal predictive 

accuracy. The statistical significance of the alternative beta estimators from the benchmark is denoted by: *, **, and 

*** for significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. The out -of -sample perio d is from January 1990 to 

December 2024. 

Downside Beta  Upside Beta 

h=1  h=3  h=6  h=12  h=1  h=3  h=6  h=12 

pca  45.75***  37.11***  29.31***  20.96***  pca  44.24***  34.31***  23.06***  14.61*** 

pls  46.30***  38.08***  30.71***  22.41***  pls  45.21***  35.92***  25.06***  17.06*** 

en  46.36***  38.36***  31.10***  23.26***  en  45.24***  36.00***  25.63***  18.00*** 

clin  46.35***  38.35***  31.09***  23.35***  clin  45.23***  36.04***  25.48***  17.91*** 

gb  46.26***  38.61***  31.62***  23.68***  gb  45.14***  36.91***  25.76***  17.63*** 

rf  46.37***  39.68***  33.81***  26.61***  rf  45.41***  37.63***  27.85***  21.00*** 

ffnn  46.41***  38.26***  30.76***  21.95***  ffnn  45.42***  36.04***  25.02***  16.74*** 

cnl  46.72***  39.87***  33.58***  26.34***  cnl  45.79***  37.97***  27.82***  21.00*** 

Semibeta - Negative  Semibeta - Positive 

h=1  h=3  h=6  h=12  h=1  h=3  h=6  h=12 

pca  45.14***  34.78***  25.58***  18.38***  pca  42.41***  37.70***  25.47***  23.65*** 

pls  46.11***  36.09***  26.96***  19.38***  pls  43.42***  39.04***  26.92***  24.72*** 

en  46.13***  36.41***  27.44***  20.38***  en  43.22***  39.12***  26.52***  25.54*** 

clin  46.11***  36.32***  27.40***  20.49***  clin  43.30***  39.07***  27.00***  25.72*** 

gb  43.98***  34.00***  28.12***  23.45***  gb  39.88***  32.02***  19.73***  16.65*** 

rf  45.69***  36.76***  30.31***  25.39***  rf  41.60***  36.58***  24.03***  24.63*** 

ffnn  46.24***  36.32***  27.17***  19.63***  ffnn  43.63***  38.75***  24.02***  18.98*** 

cnl  46.05***  37.53***  30.69***  25.73***  cnl  42.88***  37.54***  24.98***  23.69*** 

Semibeta - Mixed Sign, Negative Market Return  Semibeta - Mixed Sign, Positive Market Return 

h=1  h=3  h=6  h=12  h=1  h=3  h=6  h=12 

pca  43.70***  27.64***  12.07***  -14.72***  pca  36.70***  21.32***  1.80***  -15.83*** 

pls  44.68***  30.18***  15.08***  -9.72***  pls  37.78***  23.90***  5.33***  -12.22*** 

en  44.89***  30.91***  16.18***  -8.32***  en  38.10***  24.51***  5.98***  -11.55*** 

clin  44.74***  30.29***  15.64***  -9.36***  clin  37.84***  24.02***  5.56***  -11.82*** 

gb  43.11***  33.47***  19.05***  -2.77***  gb  38.42***  23.96***  10.01***  -4.65*** 

rf  45.52***  34.10***  19.86***  -2.73***  rf  39.32***  28.64***  10.64***  -3.05*** 

ffnn  44.97***  30.42***  20.80***  -8.34***  ffnn  38.44***  26.85***  8.46***  -10.22*** 

cnl  45.46***  34.28***  21.86***  -0.88***  cnl  40.07***  28.79***  12.45***  -1.89*** 58 

Table A2 Predictive Cross -Sectional Performance of Asymmetric Betas Across Forecasting Horizons. 

This table reports the out -of -sample  𝑅 2 of the alternative prediction models across horizons ( ℎ = 1, 3, 6, 12  months ). 

The forecasting performance is evaluated using the cross -sectional (CS)  𝑅 2 computed as the average of the monthly 

cross -sectional errors. The benchmark is the  ℎ-lagged realized beta measure for the respective asymmetric beta. The 

conditional beta forecasts are based on principal component analysis (pca), partial least squares (pls), elastic net (en), 

random forests (rf), gradient boosting (gb) and feed -forward ne ural network (ffnn). Performance is also reported for the 

equally weighted forecast combinations of the three linear models (clin) and the three non -linear models (cnl). This 

table also reports the statistical significance of the forecasts according to the Clark and West (2007) test for equal 

predictive accuracy. The statistical significance of the alternative beta estimators from the benchmark is denoted by: *, 

**, and *** for significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. The out -of -sample perio d is from January 1990 

to December 2024. 

Downside Beta  Upside Beta 

h=1  h=3  h=6  h=12  h=1  h=3  h=6  h=12 

pca  45.02***  35.42***  26.88***  16.85***  pca  43.34***  32.01***  19.65***  10.50*** 

pls  45.73***  36.72***  28.88***  19.16***  pls  44.53***  33.98***  22.11***  13.60*** 

en  45.78***  36.88***  29.04***  19.89***  en  44.56***  33.96***  22.65***  14.58*** 

clin  45.76***  36.91***  29.08***  19.94***  clin  44.53***  34.04***  22.50***  14.45*** 

gb  45.71***  37.23***  29.62***  20.29***  gb  44.62***  35.29***  23.20***  14.44*** 

rf  45.85***  38.55***  32.27***  23.96***  rf  44.89***  36.26***  25.75***  18.51*** 

ffnn  45.89***  36.97***  28.95***  18.89***  ffnn  44.77***  34.13***  22.07***  13.20*** 

cnl  46.24***  38.77***  31.96***  23.54***  cnl  45.29***  36.50***  25.48***  18.17*** 

Semibeta - Negative  Semibeta - Positive 

h=1  h=3  h=6  h=12  h=1  h=3  h=6  h=12 

pca  45.11***  35.18***  25.69***  17.73***  pca  42.28***  37.11***  25.49***  23.63*** 

pls  46.14***  36.52***  27.25***  19.03***  pls  43.32***  38.39***  26.90***  24.70*** 

en  46.19***  36.84***  27.64***  20.02***  en  43.10***  38.44***  26.44***  25.00*** 

clin  46.15***  36.77***  27.67***  20.17***  clin  43.22***  38.48***  27.06***  25.68*** 

gb  43.82***  33.87***  27.86***  22.40***  gb  39.08***  31.00***  19.70***  16.21*** 

rf  45.66***  37.01***  30.39***  25.07***  rf  41.31***  36.05***  24.46***  24.50*** 

ffnn  46.28***  36.71***  27.11***  18.76***  ffnn  43.49***  38.03***  23.68***  18.33*** 

cnl  46.03***  37.80***  30.77***  25.18***  cnl  42.55***  36.93***  25.13***  23.45*** 

Semibeta - Mixed Sign, Negative Market Return  Semibeta - Mixed Sign, Positive Market Return 

h=1  h=3  h=6  h=12  h=1  h=3  h=6  h=12 

pca  42.71***  25.57***  8.93***  -15.92***  pca  36.19***  20.20***  -1.24***  -19.28* 

pls  44.01***  28.68***  13.04***  -10.56***  pls  37.49***  23.29***  3.34***  -13.72 

en  44.07***  28.98***  13.24***  -10.65***  en  37.52***  23.16***  2.65***  -15.04 

clin  43.97***  28.58***  13.16***  -10.52***  clin  37.43***  23.13***  3.03***  -14.29 

gb  41.93***  31.73***  17.34***  -5.92***  gb  37.98***  23.13***  8.22***  -8.88* 

rf  44.72***  32.59***  17.66***  -4.22***  rf  38.95***  27.90***  7.65***  -5.77* 

ffnn  44.56***  30.05***  18.53***  -6.78***  ffnn  38.02***  25.92***  7.02***  -10.35* 

cnl  44.72***  33.08***  19.97***  -1.67***  cnl  39.60***  28.06***  10.64***  -3.92* 59 

Table A3 Predictive Time Series Performance of Reconstructed CAPM Betas Across Forecasting Horizons. 

This table reports the out -of -sample  𝑅 2 of the alternative prediction models across horizons ( ℎ = 1, 3, 6, 12  months ). 

The forecasting performance is evaluated using the time -series (TS)  𝑅 2 calculated as the average of firm -level time -

series errors. The benchmark is the  ℎ-lagged realized CAPM beta. The conditional beta forecasts are based on principal 

component analysis (pca), partial least squares (pls), elastic net (en), random forests (rf), gradient boosting (gb) and 

feed -forward neural network (ffnn). Performance is al so reported for the equally weighted forecast combinations of 

the three linear models (clin) and the three non -linear models (cnl). This table also reports the statistical significance 

of the forecasts according to the Clark and West (2007) test for equal predictive accuracy. The statistical significance 

of the alternative beta estimators from the benchmark is denoted by: *, **, and *** for significance at the 10%, 5%, 

and 1% level, respectively. The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to December 202 4. 

CAPM Beta (Downside and Upside Betas) 

h=1  h=3  h=6  h=12 

pca  36.82***  24.13***  13.11***  7.65*** 

pls  38.51***  26.55***  15.84***  10.21*** 

en  38.64***  26.84***  16.45***  11.41*** 

clin  38.55***  26.71***  16.23***  11.25*** 

gb  38.81***  28.61***  18.13***  13.32*** 

rf  39.10***  29.65***  20.52***  15.74*** 

ffnn  38.88***  27.01***  16.21***  10.18*** 

cnl  39.73***  29.96***  20.24***  15.64*** 

CAPM Beta ( Semibetas) 

h=1  h=3  h=6  h=12 

pca  37.18***  24.27***  14.00***  8.08*** 

pls  38.95***  26.75***  16.01***  10.01*** 

en  38.92***  27.34***  16.57***  11.75*** 

clin  38.89***  26.96***  16.73***  11.59*** 

gb  36.17***  25.98***  18.61***  12.92*** 

rf  38.13***  28.28***  19.16***  15.06*** 

ffnn  38.99***  26.86***  15.11***  7.74*** 

cnl  38.92***  29.06***  20.08***  15.32*** 60 

Table A 4 Predictive Cross -Sectional Performance of Reconstructed CAPM Betas Across Forecasting Horizons. 

This table reports the out -of -sample  𝑅 2 of the alternative prediction models across horizons ( ℎ = 1, 3, 6, 12  months ). 

The forecasting performance is evaluated using the cross -sectional (CS)  𝑅 2 computed as the average of the monthly 

cross -sectional errors. The benchmark is the  ℎ-lagged realized CAPM beta. The conditional beta forecasts are based 

on principal component analysis (pca), partial least squares (pls), elastic net (en), random forests (rf), gradient boosting 

(gb) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn). Performance is al so reported for the equally weighted forecast 

combinations of the three linear models (clin) and the three non -linear models (cnl). This table also reports the statistical 

significance of the forecasts according to the Clark and West (2007) test for equal predictive accuracy. The statistical 

significance of the alternative beta estimators from the benchmark is denoted by: *, **, and *** for significance at the 

10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to December 202 4. 

CAPM Beta (Downside and Upside Betas) 

h=1  h=3  h=6  h=12 

pca  34.87***  20.61***  8.91***  2.71*** 

pls  37.01***  23.64***  12.48***  6.21*** 

en  37.13***  23.73***  12.81***  7.35*** 

clin  36.98***  23.64***  12.64***  7.11*** 

gb  37.56***  26.00***  14.90***  9.48*** 

rf  37.82***  27.44***  17.94***  12.74*** 

ffnn  37.48***  24.18***  12.85***  6.31*** 

cnl  38.52***  27.65***  17.40***  12.31*** 

CAPM Beta ( Semibetas) 

h=1  h=3  h=6  h=12 

pca  35.11***  20.52***  9.33***  2.85*** 

pls  37.43***  23.81***  12.69***  6.17*** 

en  37.35***  24.29***  12.88***  7.62*** 

clin  37.26***  23.84***  13.00***  7.41*** 

gb  34.28***  23.12***  15.87***  9.46*** 

rf  36.64***  25.98***  16.60***  12.21*** 

ffnn  37.57***  24.00***  11.68***  3.87*** 

cnl  37.44***  26.58***  17.39***  12.15*** 61 

Table A5 Share Price Prediction for Individual Models Using 1 -Month Horizon Betas. 

This table reports the out -of -sample panel  𝑅 2 for observed prices compared to intrinsic values derived from 

discounted cash flow models with alternative discount rates. Intrinsic values are calculated using a one -year holding 

period with monthly cash flows based on 12 -month rolling averages of ordina ry dividends. Terminal values assume 

annual long -term growth rates from 0% to 2%. Conditional betas are converted to discount rates using a risk -free 

rate of zero and market risk premiums from 8% to 12%. The discount rates vary based on the model used to e stimate 

the reconstructed CAPM beta for  ℎ = 1. The benchmark is the respective  ℎ-lagged realized CAPM beta. The 

conditional beta forecasts are based on principal component analysis (pca), partial least squares (pls), elastic net 

(en), random forests (rf), gr adient boosting (gb) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn). Estimates of CAPM beta 

are derived as a combination of forecasts of downside and upside betas, and as a combination of forecasts of four 

semibetas. The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 t o December 2024. 

Growth Rate  0%  1%  2% 

Market Premium  8%  10%  12%  8%  10%  12%  8%  10%  12% 

CAPM Beta (Downside and Upside Betas) 

pca  20.88  12.01  6.93  33.30  20.61  11.86  21.76  26.47  16.37 

pls  20.10  11.68  6.84  28.09  18.42  10.82  17.01  20.00  12.96 

en  19.94  11.27  6.32  30.80  19.06  10.90  25.24  23.15  14.49 

gb  20.57  11.62  6.52  31.22  19.71  11.40  -8.02  13.35  10.75 

rf  20.32  11.31  6.20  33.42  19.87  11.18  20.51  26.87  16.14 

ffnn  21.36  12.36  7.19  34.49  21.26  12.40  26.41  26.71  17.51 

CAPM Beta (Semibetas) 

pca  21.19  12.27  7.15  32.51  20.44  12.03  25.95  24.90  16.17 

pls  20.98  12.23  7.19  31.75  20.14  11.92  21.37  23.46  15.77 

en  20.57  11.69  6.62  32.82  20.17  11.51  25.96  24.39  15.84 

gb  19.22  10.14  5.08  33.50  19.21  9.99  31.80  25.59  15.66 

rf  19.59  10.51  5.42  34.08  19.79  10.57  32.24  27.44  16.36 

ffnn  21.27  12.22  7.04  34.79  21.38  12.34  29.64  27.96  17.54 62 

Table A6 Share Price Prediction for Individual Models Using 3 -Month Horizon Betas. 

This table reports the out -of -sample panel  𝑅 2 for observed prices compared to intrinsic values derived from 

discounted cash flow models with alternative discount rates. Intrinsic values are calculated using a one -year 

holding period with monthly cash flows based on 12 -month rolling averages of ordina ry dividends. Terminal values 

assume annual long -term growth rates from 0% to 2%. Conditional betas are converted to discount rates using a 

risk -free rate of zero and market risk premiums from 8% to 12%. The discount rates vary based on the model used 

to e stimate the reconstructed CAPM beta for  ℎ = 1. The benchmark is the respective  ℎ-lagged realized CAPM 

beta. The conditional beta forecasts are based on principal component analysis (pca), partial least squares (pls), 

elastic net (en), random forests (rf), gr adient boosting (gb) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn). Estimates of 

CAPM beta are derived as a combination of forecasts of downside and upside betas, and as a combination of 

forecasts of four semibetas. The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 t o December 2024. 

Growth Rate  0%  1%  2% 

Market Premium  8%  10%  12%  8%  10%  12%  8%  10%  12% 

CAPM Beta (Downside and Upside Betas) 

pca  14.48  7.61  3.92  33.50  18.09  10.44  31.44  27.92  16.69 

pls  14.39  7.67  4.04  31.69  17.33  10.20  26.90  24.80  15.23 

en  13.91  7.05  3.40  32.87  17.35  9.76  33.46  27.25  15.85 

gb  14.17  7.26  3.57  33.12  17.73  10.07  11.08  20.38  15.09 

rf  14.12  7.14  3.44  33.98  18.02  10.12  28.80  27.50  16.59 

ffnn  14.97  7.94  4.16  34.83  18.89  10.92  35.64  29.59  17.73 

CAPM Beta (Semibetas) 

pca  14.59  7.70  3.99  33.31  18.12  10.49  32.34  26.02  16.20 

pls  14.55  7.71  4.03  32.97  17.94  10.43  30.66  25.76  16.15 

en  14.15  7.24  3.55  33.44  17.80  10.05  34.57  26.97  16.44 

gb  13.26  6.29  2.64  32.90  16.56  8.59  36.14  26.41  14.60 

rf  13.60  6.62  2.94  33.86  17.53  9.54  30.52  27.30  16.15 

ffnn  14.58  7.56  3.80  34.61  18.52  10.54  36.68  29.44  17.46 63 

Table A7 Share Price Prediction for Individual Models Using 6 -Month Horizon Betas. 

This table reports the out -of -sample panel  𝑅 2 for observed prices compared to intrinsic values derived from 

discounted cash flow models with alternative discount rates. Intrinsic values are calculated using a one -year 

holding period with monthly cash flows based on 12 -month rolling averages of ordina ry dividends. Terminal 

values assume annual long -term growth rates from 0% to 2%. Conditional betas are converted to discount rates 

using a risk -free rate of zero and market risk premiums from 8% to 12%. The discount rates vary based on the 

model used to e stimate the reconstructed CAPM beta for  ℎ = 1. The benchmark is the respective  ℎ-lagged 

realized CAPM beta. The conditional beta forecasts are based on principal component analysis (pca), partial least 

squares (pls), elastic net (en), random forests (rf), gr adient boosting (gb) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn). 

Estimates of CAPM beta are derived as a combination of forecasts of downside and upside betas, and as a 

combination of forecasts of four semibetas. The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 t o December 2024. 

Growth Rate  0%  1%  2% 

Market Premium  8%  10%  12%  8%  10%  12%  8%  10%  12% 

CAPM Beta (Downside and Upside Betas) 

pca  7.11  3.03  1.02  28.05  14.20  7.19  39.51  34.18  16.26 

pls  7.06  3.07  1.10  26.70  13.84  7.14  35.01  31.29  14.73 

en  6.52  2.45  0.49  27.45  13.58  6.63  39.83  33.27  15.38 

gb  6.47  2.49  0.57  23.90  12.13  6.21  14.15  23.48  9.74 

rf  6.56  2.42  0.43  28.10  13.89  6.72  33.28  33.73  15.60 

ffnn  7.36  3.13  1.04  29.26  14.71  7.42  42.48  35.34  17.02 

CAPM Beta (Semibetas) 

pca  7.19  3.12  1.12  27.39  14.07  7.23  35.30  31.29  15.52 

pls  7.19  3.14  1.14  27.27  14.03  7.25  36.23  31.94  15.47 

en  6.56  2.47  0.50  27.78  13.78  6.72  36.60  33.03  15.64 

gb  6.36  2.27  0.31  27.44  13.53  6.49  26.08  29.77  14.51 

rf  6.34  2.21  0.23  28.11  13.70  6.50  33.85  32.45  15.02 

ffnn  6.82  2.67  0.66  28.16  14.00  6.88  40.92  33.48  15.84 64 

Table A8 Share Price Prediction for Individual Models Using 12 -Month Horizon Betas. 

This table reports the out -of -sample panel  𝑅 2 for observed prices compared to intrinsic values derived from 

discounted cash flow models with alternative discount rates. Intrinsic values are calculated using a one -year 

holding period with monthly cash flows based on 12 -month rolling averages of ordina ry dividends. Terminal 

values assume annual long -term growth rates from 0% to 2%. Conditional betas are converted to discount rates 

using a risk -free rate of zero and market risk premiums from 8% to 12%. The discount rates vary based on the 

model used to e stimate the reconstructed CAPM beta for  ℎ = 1. The benchmark is the respective  ℎ-lagged realized 

CAPM beta. The conditional beta forecasts are based on principal component analysis (pca), partial least squares 

(pls), elastic net (en), random forests (rf), gr adient boosting (gb) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn). Estimates 

of CAPM beta are derived as a combination of forecasts of downside and upside betas, and as a combination of 

forecasts of four semibetas. The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 t o December 2024. 

Growth Rate  0%  1%  2% 

Market Premium  8%  10%  12%  8%  10%  12%  8%  10%  12% 

CAPM Beta (Downside and Upside Betas) 

pca  2.23  0.27  -0.59  23.97  11.50  5.26  40.92  30.12  16.28 

pls  2.10  0.23  -0.59  22.63  11.00  5.09  36.18  26.80  14.95 

en  1.52  -0.41  -1.22  23.48  10.87  4.65  41.64  29.70  15.60 

gb  1.59  -0.27  -1.06  21.85  10.47  4.61  22.58  23.75  14.15 

rf  1.62  -0.39  -1.23  24.27  11.14  4.72  41.18  30.27  16.10 

ffnn  2.36  0.26  -0.66  24.96  11.86  5.41  42.54  31.27  16.85 

CAPM Beta (Semibetas) 

pca  2.20  0.22  -0.64  23.82  11.44  5.24  38.53  29.11  15.91 

pls  2.16  0.24  -0.60  23.17  11.17  5.15  37.67  27.65  15.38 

en  1.60  -0.36  -1.17  23.84  11.03  4.75  42.59  29.83  15.86 

gb  1.56  -0.34  -1.14  22.00  10.47  4.55  31.74  23.86  13.65 

rf  1.58  -0.44  -1.27  24.42  11.17  4.72  35.45  30.75  16.21 

ffnn  1.61  -0.37  -1.20  23.09  10.79  4.61  42.01  29.32  15.39 65 

Table A9 Share Price Prediction for Individual Models Using Betas Across Horizons. 

This table reports the out -of -sample panel  𝑅 2 for observed prices compared to intrinsic values derived from 

discounted cash flow models with alternative discount rates. Intrinsic values are calculated using a one -year 

holding period with monthly cash flows based on 12 -month rolling averages of ordina ry dividends. Terminal 

values assume annual long -term growth rates from 0% to 2%. Conditional betas are converted to discount rates 

using a risk -free rate of zero and market risk premiums from 8% to 12%. The discount rates vary based on the 

model used to e stimate the reconstructed CAPM beta for  ℎ = 1. The benchmark is the respective  ℎ-lagged realized 

CAPM beta. The conditional beta forecasts are based on principal component analysis (pca), partial least squares 

(pls), elastic net (en), random forests (rf), gr adient boosting (gb) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn). Estimates 

of CAPM beta are derived as a combination of forecasts of downside and upside betas, and as a combination of 

forecasts of four semibetas. The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 t o December 2024. 

Growth Rate  0%  1%  2% 

Market Premium  8%  10%  12%  8%  10%  12%  8%  10%  12% 

CAPM Beta (Downside and Upside Betas) 

pca  5.69  2.60  1.09  35.49  18.68  10.36  60.15  48.22  28.20 

pls  5.57  2.57  1.09  34.36  18.24  10.20  54.86  44.68  27.08 

en  5.02  1.95  0.49  35.12  18.13  9.80  61.69  48.11  27.79 

gb  5.08  2.07  0.63  33.47  17.76  9.74  40.54  41.72  26.08 

rf  5.10  1.96  0.47  35.79  18.37  9.85  61.64  48.60  28.23 

ffnn  5.83  2.60  1.04  36.38  19.04  10.51  63.05  49.56  28.86 

CAPM Beta (Semibetas) 

pca  5.66  2.56  1.05  35.40  18.65  10.34  58.79  47.09  27.91 

pls  5.63  2.58  1.09  34.86  18.40  10.26  56.66  46.08  27.48 

en  5.10  2.00  0.53  35.43  18.28  9.88  61.73  48.28  28.02 

gb  5.06  2.01  0.56  33.83  17.76  9.69  49.15  40.88  24.98 

rf  5.07  1.92  0.43  35.92  18.40  9.86  57.63  49.05  28.32 

ffnn  5.10  1.99  0.51  34.80  18.06  9.76  61.23  47.02  27.40 66 

Figure A1 Average Predictive Performance of Quintile Portfolios for Individual Models: 1 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the time series averages of monthly mean squared errors (MSE) for quintile portfolios for  ℎ =

1. Portfolios are formed monthly by sorting stocks into quintiles according to realised beta values (1 -low beta, 5-

high beta). The equally weighted MSE is constructed for each quintile , for the benchmark (red bars) and the 

conditional beta forecasts (blue bars). The figure also reports the fraction of stocks within each portfolio for which 

the difference between realized and forecast portfolio betas is positive (dots, right -hand axis). The benchmark is the 

ℎ-lagged realized beta measure for the respective asymmetric beta. The conditional beta forecasts are based on 

principal component analysis (pca), partial least squares (pls), elastic net (en), random fo rests (rf), gradient boosting 

(gb) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn). The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to December 2024. 67 

Figure A1 Average Predictive Performance of Quintile Portfolios for Individual Models: 1 -Month Horizon. 

(Continued.) 68 

Figure A1 Average Predictive Performance of Quintile Portfolios for Individual Models: 1 -Month Horizon. 

(Continued.) 69 

Figure A2 Average Predictive Performance of Quintile Portfolios for Individual Models: 3 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the time series averages of monthly mean squared errors (MSE) for quintile portfolios for  ℎ =

3. Portfolios are formed monthly by sorting stocks into quintiles according to realised beta values (1 -low beta, 5-

high beta). The equally weighted MSE is constructed for each quintile , for the benchmark (red bars) and the 

conditional beta forecasts (blue bars). The figure also reports the fraction of stocks within each portfolio for which 

the difference between realized and forecast portfolio betas is positive (dots, right -hand axis). The benchmark is the 

ℎ-lagged realized beta measure for the respective asymmetric beta. The conditional beta forecasts are based on 

principal component analysis (pca), partial least squares (pls), elastic net (en), random forests (rf), gradient boosting 

(g b) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn). The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to December 2024. 70 

Figure A2 Average Predictive Performance of Quintile Portfolios for Individual Models: 3 -Month Horizon. 

(Continued.) 71 

Figure A2 Average Predictive Performance of Quintile Portfolios for Individual Models: 3 -Month Horizon. 

(Continued.) 72 

Figure A3 Average Predictive Performance of Quintile Portfolios for Individual Models: 6 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the time series averages of monthly mean squared errors (MSE) for quintile portfolios for 

ℎ = 6. Portfolios are formed monthly by sorting stocks into quintiles according to realised beta values (1 -low 

beta, 5-high beta). The equally weighted MSE is constructed for each quintile , for the benchmark (red bars) 

and the conditional beta forecasts (blue bars). The figure also reports the fraction of stocks within each portfolio 

for which the difference between realized and forecast portfolio betas is positive (dots, right -hand axis). The 

benchmark is the  ℎ-lagged realized beta measure for the respective asymmetric beta. The conditional beta 

forecasts are based on principal component analysis (pca), partial least squares (pls), elastic net (en), random 

forests (rf), gradient boosting (g b) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn). The out -of -sample period is from 

January 1990 to December 2024. 73 

Figure A3 Average Predictive Performance of Quintile Portfolios for Individual Models: 6 -Month Horizon. 

(Continued.) 74 

Figure A3 Average Predictive Performance of Quintile Portfolios for Individual Models: 6 -Month Horizon. 

(Continued.) 75 

Figure A4 Average Predictive Performance of Quintile Portfolios for Individual Models: 12 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the time series averages of monthly mean squared errors (MSE) for quintile portfolios for  ℎ =

12 . Portfolios are formed monthly by sorting stocks into quintiles according to realised beta values (1 -low beta, 5-

high beta). The equally weighted MSE is constructed for each quintile , for the benchmark (red bars) and the 

conditional beta forecasts (blue bars). The figure also reports the fraction of stocks within each portfolio for which 

the difference between realized and forecast portfolio betas is positive (dots, right -hand axis). The benchmark is 

the  ℎ-lagged realized beta measure for the respective asymmetric beta. The conditional beta forecasts are based on 

principal component analysis (pca), partial least squares (pls), elastic net (en), random forests (rf), gradient boosting 

(g b) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn). The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to December 2024. 76 

Figure A4 Average Predictive Performance of Quintile Portfolios for Individual Models: 12 -Month Horizon. 

(Continued.) 77 

Figure A4 Average Predictive Performance of Quintile Portfolios for Individual Models: 12 -Month Horizon. 

(Continued.) 78 

Figure A5 Average Variable Importance : 3 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the variable importance for each of the six groups of predictors. The variable importance in each 

period is computed according to the permutation feature importance. Variable importance is averaged throughout 

the out -of -sample period and is normalized for each model to sum to 100. The conditional beta forecasts are based 

on principal component analysis ( pca ), partial least squares ( pls ), elastic net (en ), random forests (rf ), gradient 

boosting (gb ) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn ). The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to December 

2024. 79 

Figure A6 Average Variable Importance : 6 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the variable importance for each of the six groups of predictors. The variable importance in 

each period is computed according to the permutation feature importance. Variable importance is averaged 

throughout the out -of -sample period and is normalized for each model to sum to 100. The conditional beta 

forecasts are based on principal component analysis ( pca ), partial least squares ( pls ), elastic net (en ), random 

forests (rf ), gradient boosting (gb ) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn ). The out -of -sample period is from 

January 1990 to December 2024. 80 

Figure A7 Average Variable Importance : 12 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the variable importance for each of the six groups of predictors. The variable importance in 

each period is computed according to the permutation feature importance. Variable importance is averaged 

throughout the out -of -sample period and is normalized for each model to sum to 100. The conditional beta forecasts 

are based on principal component analysis ( pca ), partial least squares ( pls ), elastic net (en ), random forests (rf ), 

gradient boosting (gb ) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn ). The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to 

December 2024 .81 

Figure A8 Cumulative Difference of Forecast Errors Over Time of CAPM Beta for Individual Models: 1 -Month 

Horizon. 

This figure displays the cumulative differences in squared forecast errors of CAPM beta for the benchmark 

relative to the conditional beta forecasting models for  ℎ = 1. The benchmark is the  ℎ-lagged realized CAPM beta. 

The conditional beta forecasts are based on principal component analysis ( pca ), partial least squares ( pls ), elastic 

net (en ), random forests (rf ), gradient boosting (gb ) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn ). Estimates of CAPM 

beta are derived as a combination of forecasts of downside and upside betas (green line), and as a combination of 

forecasts of four semibetas (blue line). The shaded regions depict NBER -dated recessions. Higher values indicate 

improved predictive performance from the benchmark. The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to 

December 2024. 82 

Figure A9 Cumulative Difference of Forecast Errors Over Time of CAPM Beta for Individual Models: 3 -Month 

Horizon. 

This figure displays the cumulative differences in squared forecast errors of CAPM beta for the benchmark relative 

to the conditional beta forecasting models for  ℎ = 3. The benchmark is the  ℎ-lagged realized CAPM beta. The 

conditional beta forecasts are based on principal component analysis ( pca ), partial least squares ( pls ), elastic net 

(en ), random forests (rf ), gradient boosting (gb ) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn ). Estimates of CAPM beta 

are derived as a combination of forecasts of downside and upside betas (green line), and as a combination of 

forecasts of four semibetas (blue line). The shaded regions depict NBER -dated recessions. Higher values indicate 

improved predictive performance from the benchmark. The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to 

December 2024. 83 

Figure A10 Cumulative Difference of Forecast Errors Over Time of CAPM Beta for Individual Models: 6 -Month 

Horizon. 

This figure displays the cumulative differences in squared forecast errors of CAPM beta for the benchmark relative 

to the conditional beta forecasting models for  ℎ = 6. The benchmark is the  ℎ-lagged realized CAPM beta. The 

conditional beta forecasts are based on principal component analysis ( pca ), partial least squares ( pls ), elastic net 

(en ), random forests (rf ), gradient boosting (gb ) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn ). Estimates of CAPM beta 

are derived as a combination of forecasts of downside and upside betas (green line), and as a combination of 

forecasts of four semibetas (blue line). The shaded regions depict NBER -dated recessions. Higher values indicate 

improved predictive performance from the benchmark. The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to 

December 2024. 84 

Figure A11 Cumulative Difference of Forecast Errors Over Time of CAPM Beta for Individual Models: 12 -Month 

Horizon. 

This figure displays the cumulative differences in squared forecast errors of CAPM beta for the benchmark relative 

to the conditional beta forecasting models for  ℎ = 12 . The benchmark is the  ℎ-lagged realized CAPM beta. The 

conditional beta forecasts are based on principal component analysis ( pca ), partial least squares ( pls ), elastic net 

(en ), random forests (rf ), gradient boosting (gb ) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn ). Estimates of CAPM beta 

are derived as a combination of forecasts of downside and upside betas (green line), and as a combination of 

forecasts of four semibetas (blue line). The shaded regions depict NBER -dated recessions. Higher values indicate 

improved predictive performance from the benchmark. The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to 

December 2024. 85 

Figure A12 Average Predictive Performance of Quintile Portfolios of CAPM Beta for Individual Models: 1 -Month 

Horizon. 

This figure displays the time series averages of monthly mean squared errors (MSE) for quintile portfolios for  ℎ =

1. Portfolios are formed monthly by sorting stocks into quintiles according to realised beta values (1 -low beta, 5-

high beta). The equally weighted MSE is constructed for each quintile , for the benchmark (red bars) and the 

conditional beta forecasts (blue bars). The figure also reports the fraction of stocks within each portfolio for which 

the difference between realized and forecast portfolio betas is positive (dots, right -hand axis). The benchmark is the 

ℎ-lagged realized CAPM beta. The conditional beta forecasts are based on principal component analysis ( pca ), 

partial least squares ( pls ), elastic net (en ), random forests (rf ), gradient boosting (gb ) and feed -forward neural 

network (ffnn ). Estimates of CAPM beta are derived as a combination of forecasts of downside and upside betas, 

and as a combination of forecasts of four semibetas. The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to December 

2024. 86 

Figure A13 Average Predictive Performance of Quintile Portfolios of CAPM Beta for Individual Models: 3 -Month 

Horizon. 

This figure displays the time series averages of monthly mean squared errors (MSE) for quintile portfolios for  ℎ =

3. Portfolios are formed monthly by sorting stocks into quintiles according to realised beta values (1 -low beta, 5-

high beta). The equally weighted MSE is constructed for each quintile , for the benchmark (red bars) and the 

conditional beta forecasts (blue bars). The figure also reports the fraction of stocks within each portfolio for which 

the difference between realized and forecast portfolio betas is positive (dots, right -hand axis). The benchmark is the 

ℎ-lagged realized CAPM beta. The conditional beta f orecasts are based on principal component analysis ( pca ), partial 

least squares ( pls ), elastic net (en ), random forests (rf ), gradient boosting (gb ) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn ). 

Estimates of CAPM beta are derived as a combination of forecasts of downside and upside betas, and as a 

combination of forecasts of four semibetas. The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to December 2024. 87 

Figure A14 Average Predictive Performance of Quintile Portfolios of CAPM Beta for Individual Models: 6 -Month 

Horizon. 

This figure displays the time series averages of monthly mean squared errors (MSE) for quintile portfolios for  ℎ =

6. Portfolios are formed monthly by sorting stocks into quintiles according to realised beta values (1 -low beta, 5-

high beta). The equally weighted MSE is constructed for each quintile , for the benchmark (red bars) and the 

conditional beta forecasts (blue bars). The figure also reports the fraction of stocks within each portfolio for which 

the difference between realized and forecast portfolio betas is positive (dots, right -hand axis). The benchmark is 

the  ℎ-lagged realized CAPM beta. The conditional beta f orecasts are based on principal component analysis ( pca ), 

partial least squares ( pls ), elastic net (en ), random forests (rf ), gradient boosting (gb ) and feed -forward neural 

network (ffnn ). Estimates of CAPM beta are derived as a combination of forecasts of downside and upside betas, 

and as a combination of forecasts of four semibetas. The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to December 

2024. 88 

Figure A15 Average Predictive Performance of Quintile Portfolios of CAPM Beta for Individual Models: 12 -Month 

Horizon. 

This figure displays the time series averages of monthly mean squared errors (MSE) for quintile portfolios for  ℎ =

12 . Portfolios are formed monthly by sorting stocks into quintiles according to realised beta values (1 -low beta, 5-

high beta). The equally weighted MSE is constructed for each quintile , for the benchmark (red bars) and the 

conditional beta forecasts (blue bars). The figure also reports the fraction of stocks within each portfolio for which 

the difference between realized and forecast portfolio betas is positive (dots, right -hand axis). The benchmark is the 

ℎ-lagged realized CAPM beta. The conditional beta forecasts are based on principal component analysis ( pca ), 

partial least squares ( pls ), elastic net (en ), random forests (rf ), gradient boosting (gb ) and feed -forward neural 

network (ffnn ). Estimates of CAPM beta are derived as a combination of forecasts of downside and upside betas, 

and as a combination of forecasts of four semibetas. The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to December 

2024. 89 

Figure A16 Market -Neutral Minimum -Variance Portfolio Based on Individual Model Forecasts: 1 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the distribution of monthly ex -post realized betas for market -neutral minimum -variance 

portfolios for  ℎ = 1. Portfolios are constructed based on the  ℎ-lagged historical CAPM beta benchmark (grey), and 

conditional CAPM beta s reconstructed from forecasts of downside and upside betas (green), and from forecasts of 

the four semibetas (blue). Dashed vertical lines and annotations indicate the modes of each distribution. The 

conditional beta forecasts are based on principal component analysis ( pca ), partial least squares ( pls ), elastic net (en ), 

random forests (rf ), gradient boosting (gb ) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn ). The out -of -sample period is from 

January 1990 to December 2024. 90 

Figure A17 Market -Neutral Minimum -Variance Portfolio Based on Individual Model Forecasts: 3 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the distribution of monthly ex -post realized betas for market -neutral minimum -variance 

portfolios for  ℎ = 3. Portfolios are constructed based on the  ℎ-lagged historical CAPM beta benchmark (grey), 

and conditional CAPM beta s reconstructed from forecasts of downside and upside betas (green), and from forecasts 

of the four semibetas (blue). Dashed vertical lines and annotations indicate the modes of each distribution. The 

conditional beta forecasts are based on principal component analysis ( pca ), partial least squares ( pls ), elastic net 

(en ), random forests (rf ), gradient boosting (gb ) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn ). The out -of -sample period 

is from January 1990 to December 2024. 91 

Figure A18 Market -Neutral Minimum -Variance Portfolio based on Individual Model Forecasts: 6 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the distribution of monthly ex -post realized betas for market -neutral minimum -variance 

portfolios for  ℎ = 6. Portfolios are constructed based on the  ℎ-lagged historical CAPM beta benchmark (grey), and 

conditional CAPM beta s reconstructed from forecasts of downside and upside betas (green), and from forecasts of 

the four semibetas (blue). Dashed vertical lines and annotations indicate the modes of each distribution. The 

conditional beta forecasts are based on principal component analysis ( pca ), partial least squares ( pls ), elastic net (en ), 

random forests (rf ), gradient boosting (gb ) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn ). The out -of -sample period is from 

January 1990 to December 2024. 92 

Figure A19 Market -Neutral Minimum -Variance Portfolio based on Individual Model Forecasts: 12 -Month Horizon. 

This figure displays the distribution of monthly ex -post realized betas for market -neutral minimum -variance portfolios 

for  ℎ = 12 . Portfolios are constructed based on the  ℎ-lagged historical CAPM beta benchmark (grey), and conditional 

CAPM beta s reconstructed from forecasts of downside and upside betas (green), and from forecasts of the four 

semibetas (blue). Dashed vertical lines and annotations indicate the modes of each distribution. The conditional beta 

forecasts are based on principal component analysis ( pca ), partial least squares ( pls ), elastic net (en ), random forests 

(rf ), gradient boosting (gb ) and feed -forward neural network (ffnn ). The out -of -sample period is from January 1990 to 

December 2024. 93 

## Appendix 2: Information on the Predictor Set 

Table B1 Variable Description. 

This table reports the firm -specific characteristics that comprise the predictor set. Of the 214 predictors, 207 

are from the Open Source Asset Pricing database by Chen and Zimmermann (2022), the remaining 7 

predictors are lagged realized beta estimators of the CAPM beta, the upside and downside betas and the four 

semibetas, based on daily data (predictor # 173 -179 ). The second column provides the acronyms of the 

variables in Open Source Asset Pricing database, the third column gives a short description of the variables. 

The predictors are categorised according to the six groups from Hou et al. (2020) : Intangibles, Investment, 

Momentum, Prof itability, Trading Frictions, and Value vs Growth . More information on the characteristics 

and their construction can be found on the Open Source Asset Pricing website: 

https://www.openassetpricing.com/ . The full sample period is from January 1980 to December 202 4. All 

predictors have been lagged by  ℎ months. 

# Acronym  Description 

A. Predictors in the Momentum Group 

1 AnnouncementReturn  Earnings announcement return 

2 CustomerMomentum  Customer momentum 

3 EarningsStreak  Earnings surprise streak 

4 EarningsSurprise  Earnings surprise 

5 EarnSupBig  Earnings surprise of big firms 

6 FirmAgeMom  Firm age momentum 

7 High52  52 -week high 

8 IndMom  Industry momentum 

9 IndRetBig  Industry return of big firms 

10  IntMom  Intermediate momentum 

11  iomom_cust  Customers momentum 

12  iomom_supp  Suppliers momentum 

13  LRreversal  Long -term reversal 

14  Mom12m  Momentum (12 months) 

15  Mom12mOffSeason  Momentum without the seasonal part 

16  Mom6m  Momentum (6 months) 

17  Mom6mJunk  Junk stock momentum 

18  MomOffSeason  Off -season long -term reversal 

19  MomOffSeason06YrPlus  Off -season reversal years 6 to 10 

20  MomOffSeason11YrPlus  Off -season reversal years 11 to 15 

21  MomOffSeason16YrPlus  Off -season reversal years 16 to 20 

22  MomRev  Momentum and long -term reversal 

23  MomSeason  Return seasonality years 2 to 5 

24  MomSeason06YrPlus  Return seasonality years 6 to 10 

25  MomSeason11YrPlus  Return seasonality years 11 to 15 

26  MomSeason16YrPlus  Return seasonality years 16 to 20 

27  MomSeasonShort  Return seasonality last year 

28  MomVol  Momentum in high -volume stocks 

29  MRreversal  Momentum reversal 

30  NumEarnIncrease  Earnings streak length 

31  ResidualMomentum  Momentum based on FF3 residuals 

32  retConglomerate  Conglomerate return 

33  REV6  Earnings forecast revisions 

34  RevenueSurprise  Revenue surprise 

35  streversal  Short -term reversal 

36  TrendFactor  Trend factor 94 

B. Predictors in the Value vs Growth Group 

37  AM  Total assets to market 

38  BM  Book to market using most recent ME 

39  BMdec  Book to market using December ME 

40  BookLeverage  Book leverage (annual) 

41  BPEBM  Leverage component of BM 

42  Cash  Cash to assets 

43  CF  Cash flow to market 

44  cfp  Operating cash flows to price 

45  DivInit  Dividend initiation 

46  DivOmit  Dividend omission 

47  DivSeason  Dividend seasonality 

48  DivYieldST  Predicted dividend yield next month 

49  EBM  Enterprise component of BM 

50  EntMult  Enterprise multiple 

51  EP  Earnings -to -price ratio 

52  EquityDuration  Equity duration 

53  FEPS  Analyst earnings per share 

54  IntanBM  Intangible return using BM 

55  IntanCFP  Intangible return using CF -to -P

56  IntanEP  Intangible return using EP 

57  IntanSP  Intangible return using Sale -to -P

58  Size  Log size 

59  MeanRankRevGrowth  Revenue growth rank 

60  NetDebtPrice  Net debt to price 

61  NetPayoutYield  Net payout yield 

62  PayoutYield  Payout yield 

63  sfe  Earnings forecast to price 

64  SP  Sales to price 95 

C. Predictors in the Investment Group 

65  AbnormalAccruals  Abnormal accruals 

66  Accruals  Accruals 

67  AccrualsBM  Book to market and accruals 

68  AssetGrowth  Asset growth 

69  BrandInvest  Brand capital investment 

70  ChInv  Change in capital investment 

71  ChInvIA  Change in capital investment (industry adjusted) 

72  ChNNCOA  Change in net noncurrent operating assets 

73  CompEquIss  Composite equity issuance 

74  CompositeDebtIssuance  Composite debt issuance 

75  DebtIssuance  Debt issuance 

76  DelCOA  Change in current operating assets 

77  DelCOL  Change in current operating liabilities 

78  DelEqu  Change in equity to assets 

79  DelFINL  Change in financial liabilities 

80  DelLTI  Change in long -term investment 

81  DelNetFin  Change in net financial assets 

82  dNoa  Change in net operating assets 

83  grcapx  Change in capex (2 years) 

84  grcapx3y  Change in capex (3 years) 

85  GrLTNOA  Growth in long -term operating assets 

86  Investment  Investment to revenue 

87  InvestPPEInv  Change in PPE and inventory / assets 

88  InvGrowth  Inventory growth 

89  NetDebtFinance  Net debt financing 

90  NetEquityFinance  Net equity financing 

91  NOA  Net operating assets 

92  PctAcc  Percent operating accruals 

93  PctTotAcc  Percent total accruals 

94  ShareIss1Y  Share issuance (1 year) 

95  ShareIss5Y  Share issuance (5 years) 

96  ShareRepurchase  Share repurchases 

97  TotalAccruals  Total accruals 

98  XFIN  Net external financing 

D. Predictors in the Profitability Group 

99  CBOperProf  Cash -based operating profitability 

100  ChAssetTurnover  Change in asset turnover 

101  ChNWC  Change in net working capital 

102  CredRatDG  Credit rating downgrade 

103  DelDRC  Deferred revenue 

104  GP  Gross profits / total assets 

105  Leverage  Market leverage 

106  MS  Mohanram G -score 

107  OperProf  Operating profits / book equity 

108  OperProfRD  Operating profitability R&D adjusted 

109  OScore  O score 

110  PS  Piotroski F -score 

111  roaq  Return on assets (quarterly) 

112  RoE  Net income / book equity 

113  Tax  Taxable income to income 96 

E. Predictors in the Intangibles Group 

114  Activism1  Takeover vulnerability 

115  Activism2  Active shareholders 

116  AdExp  Advertising expense 

117  AgeIPO  IPO and age 

118  AnalystRevision  EPS forecast revision 

119  AnalystValue  Analyst value 

120  AOP  Analyst optimism 

121  CashProd  Cash productivity 

122  ChangeInRecommendation  Change in recommendation 

123  ChEQ  Growth in book equity 

124  ChForecastAccrual  Change in forecast and accrual 

125  ChNAnalyst  Decline in analyst coverage 

126  ChTax  Change in taxes 

127  CitationsRD  Citations to R&D expenses 

128  ConsRecomm  Consensus recommendation 

129  ConvDebt  Convertible debt indicator 

130  DelBreadth  Breadth of ownership 

131  DownRecomm  Down forecast 

132  EarningsConsistency  Earnings consistency 

133  EarningsForecastDisparity  Long vs. short EPS forecasts 

134  ExclExp  Excluded expenses 

135  fgr5yrLag  Long -term EPS forecast 

136  FirmAge  Firm age based on CRSP 

137  ForecastDispersion  EPS forecast dispersion 

138  FR  Pension funding status 

139  Frontier  Efficient frontier index 

140  Governance  Governance index 

141  GrAdExp  Growth in advertising expenses 

142  GrSaleToGrInv  Sales growth over inventory growth 

143  GrSaleToGrOverhead  Sales growth over overhead growth 

144  Herf  Industry concentration (sales) 

145  HerfAsset  Industry concentration (assets) 

146  HerfBE  Industry concentration (equity) 

147  hire  Employment growth 

148  IndIPO  Initial public offerings 

149  IO_ShortInterest  Institutional ownership among high short interest 

150  OPLeverage  Operating leverage 

151  OrderBacklog  Order backlog 

152  OrderBacklogChg  Change in order backlog 

153  OrgCap  Organizational capital 

154  PatentsRD  Patents to R&D expenses 

155  PredictedFE  Predicted analyst forecast error 

156  RD  R&D over market cap 

157  RDAbility  R&D ability 

158  RDcap  R&D capital to assets 

159  RDIPO  IPO and no R&D spending 

160  RDS  Real dirty surplus 

161  realestate  Real estate holdings 

162  Recomm_ShortInterest  Analyst recommendation and short interest 

163  RIO_Disp  Institutional ownership and forecast dispersion 

164  RIO_MB  Institutional ownership and market to book 

165  RIO_Turnover  Institutional ownership and turnover 

166  RIO_Volatility  Institutional ownership and idiosyncratic volatility 

167  sinAlgo  Sin stock (selection criteria) 

168  Spinoff  Spin -offs 

169  SurpriseRD  Unexpected R&D increase 

170  tang  Tangibility 

171  UpRecomm  Up forecast 

172  VarCF  Cash flow to price variance 97 

F. Predictors in the Trading Frictions Group 

173  capm_rl_lag  CAPM realized beta (h months) 

174  down_rl_lag  Downside realized beta (h months) 

175  up_rl_lag  Upside realized beta (h months) 

176  neg_rl_lag  Negative realized semibeta (h months) 

177  pos_rl_lag  Positive realized semibeta (h months) 

178  mneg_rl_lag  Mixed sign realized semibeta, negative market return (h months) 

179  mpos_rl_lag  Mixed sign realized semibeta, positive market return (h months) 

180  Beta  CAPM beta 

181  BetaFP  Frazzini -Pedersen beta 

182  BetaLiquidityPS  Pastor -Stambaugh liquidity beta 

183  BetaTailRisk  Tail risk beta 

184  betaVIX  Systematic volatility 

185  BidAskSpread  Bid -ask spread 

186  CoskewACX  Coskewness using daily returns 

187  Coskewness  Coskewness 

188  DolVol  Past trading volume 

189  ExchSwitch  Exchange switch 

190  RealizedVol  Idiosyncratic risk (1 factor) 

191  IdioVol3F  Idiosyncratic risk (3 factors) 

192  IdioVolAHT  Idiosyncratic risk (AHT) 

193  Illiquidity  Amihud's illiquidity 

194  Price  Log price 

195  MaxRet  Maximum return over month 

196  OptionVolume1  Option to stock volume 

197  OptionVolume2  Option volume to average 

198  PriceDelayRsq  Price delay R2 

199  PriceDelaySlope  Price delay coefficient 

200  PriceDelayTstat  Price delay SE adjusted 

201  ProbInformedTrading  Probability of informed trading 

202  ReturnSkew  Return skewness 

203  ReturnSkew3F  Idiosyncratic skewness (3F model) 

204  ShareVol  Share volume 

205  ShortInterest  Short interest 

206  skew1  Volatility smirk near the money 

207  SmileSlope  Put vol. minus call vol. 

208  std_turn  Share turnover volatility 

209  VolMkt  Volume to market equity 

210  VolSD  Volume variance 

211  VolumeTrend  Volume trend 

212  zerotrade1m  Days with zero trades (1m) 

213  zerotrade6m  Days with zero trades (6m) 

214  zerotrade12m  Days with zero trades (12m)