Title: MAFIG: Multi-agent Driven Formal Instruction Generation Framework

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.10989v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Apr 2026 01:43:32 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# MAFIG: Multi-agent Driven Formal Instruction Generation Framework 

## Shixing Zhao a, Zheng Si a, Pengpeng Ouyang a, Zhengqing Hu a, Wanqi Zhu a, Dong Chen a,b,c,d ,∗,Yibo Guo a,b,c,d ,∗ and Mingliang Xu a,b,c,d ,∗

> a

School of Computer and Artificial Intelligence, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, 450001, Henan, China 

> b

Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Swarm Systems, Ministry of Education, Zhengzhou, 450001, Henan, China 

> c

National Supercomputing Center in Zhengzhou, Zhengzhou, 450001, Henan, China 

> d

Henan Research Center for Large Model Technology and New Quality Software Engineering, Zhengzhou, 450001, Henan, China 

A R T I C L E I N F O 

Keywords :Scheduling systems Emergency situations Multi-agent 

A B S T R A C T 

Emergency situations in scheduling systems often trigger local functional failures that undermine system stability and even cause system collapse. Existing methods primarily rely on robust scheduling or reactive scheduling, handling emergencies through predefined rules or rescheduling strategies. However, the diversity and unpredictability of real-world emergencies make them difficult to antici-pate, which limits the adaptability of these methods in complex scenarios. Recent studies have shown that Large Language Models (LLMs) possess strong potential for complex scheduling tasks because of their extensive prior knowledge and strong reasoning capabilities. Nevertheless, the high inference latency of LLMs and the lengthy contextual information of scheduling systems significantly hinder their application for emergency handling. To mitigate these issues, we propose the Multi-agent Driven Formal Instruction Generation Framework (MAFIG). The framework constrains the decision scope to local functional modules affected by emergency situations and repairs scheduling logic rapidly by generating formal instructions. MAFIG contains a Perception Agent and an Emergency Decision Agent, which mitigates the adverse impact of lengthy system contexts on emergency decision-making. We further introduce span-focused loss-driven local distillation mechanism (SFL) to transfer the decision-making capability of powerful Cloud Large Language Models (C-LLMs) to lightweight local models, reducing inference latency while preserving decision-making effectiveness. Experiments in the Port, Warehousing, and Deck scheduling datasets show success rates of 98.49%, 94.97%, and 97.50%, with average processing times of 0.33 s, 0.23 s, and 0.19 s. These results demonstrate that MAFIG effectively mitigates the impact of emergencies and improves the robustness and adaptability of scheduling systems. 

## 1. Introduction 

Modern scheduling systems are essential for ensuring the orderly and efficient execution of tasks in industrial sce-narios [1, 2], such as ports and warehousing. Most existing scheduling systems are built on tightly coupled architectures, which achieve satisfactory performance in static and mildly dynamic environments [3]. However, when environmental states, system resources, or scheduling constraints fluctuate, local emergency situations can easily trigger cascading fail-ures across the system [4], ultimately undermining the con-tinuous and stable operation. Consequently, improving the robustness and sustained operability of scheduling systems requires decoupling complex architectures into functionally distinct and relatively independent submodules [5], enabling localized correction under emergency situations. By leveraging task decomposition and allocation mech-anisms, existing decoupled scheduling systems decompose complex scheduling problems into relatively independent subtasks and employ efficient evaluation frameworks [6–8], thereby improving planning effectiveness and operational responsiveness. However, in practical operations, although emergency situations occur with relatively low frequency, 

> ∗

Corresponding author  

> shixing@gs.zzu.edu.cn

(S. Zhao); chendongai@zzu.edu.cn (D. Chen); ieybguo@zzu.edu.cn (Y. Guo); iexumingliang@zzu.edu.cn (M. Xu) 

> ORCID

(s): 0009-0001-5894-5133 (S. Zhao); 0000-0002-4859-1757 (D. Chen); 0000-0002-7336-6252 (Y. Guo) Collision (37.2%) 

> Contact (25.2%)
> Fire/explosion (12.8%)
> Machinery damage/failure (8.8%)
> Wrecked/stranded (8.7%)
> Hull damage (1.6%)
> Foundered (1.1%)
> Miscellaneous (4.6%)

Figure 1: Accident types in Mediterranean port areas. 

they often significantly disrupt the overall scheduling plan [3]. As illustrated in Fig. 1, empirical statistics on Mediter-ranean port accidents [9] indicate that emergency situations are characterized by a broad variety and severe impacts, which make them inherently difficult to anticipate, limiting the ability of scheduling systems to handle them through predefined rules. Meanwhile, the severe consequences of emergencies require timely and appropriate response mea-sures to mitigate their impact on system operations. For instance, vessel arrival delays may be triggered by hetero-geneous factors such as adverse weather or channel control. These delays do not merely postpone a single operational 

Shixing Zhao et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 1 of 13 

> arXiv:2604.10989v1 [cs.AI] 13 Apr 2026 Multi-agent Driven Formal Instruction Generation Framework

node. Instead, they propagate across multiple functional modules, including berth allocation, quay crane scheduling, and yard planning, and leading to cascading scheduling conflicts and systemic resource underutilization. Neverthe-less, most existing decoupled scheduling systems are still built on static or semi-static modeling assumptions, which limit their resilience to emergency situations [10]. When emergency situations cause functional modules to fail, these systems often lack efficient mechanisms for revising their core logical structure [11]. Although recent studies have introduced adaptive scheduling and optimization modules [12], such adjustments are typically limited to parameter or policy levels and cannot directly modify the core logical structure of the scheduling system. In recent years, the rapid advancement of Large Lan-guage Models (LLMs) in natural language understanding, logical reasoning, and code generation has drawn increas-ing attention to their potential in complex planning and scheduling problems [13, 14]. First, owing to their strong language understanding capabilities [15–17], LLMs can per-form high-level semantic parsing of input instructions and convert unstructured or incomplete information into ac-tionable inputs for decision-making. Second, when con-fronted with emergency situations, LLMs do not need to rely on manually specified rules. Instead, by parsing the instructions and integrating with their internal extensive prior knowledge and strong reasoning capabilities [18–20], they can generate feasible formal instructions for handling emergency situations. Finally, with their code generation and modification capabilities, LLMs demonstrate the potential to directly revise the core logical structure of scheduling systems, rather than remaining limited to parameter or policy adjustments. Despite these advantages, the direct integra-tion of LLMs into scheduling systems for emergency han-dling still faces two major challenges: (1) Latency-Quality Tradeoff : model size is generally positively correlated with decision-making capability, but increasing the number of parameters inevitably leads to a substantial rise in inference latency [21]. In scheduling systems driven by large models, delayed responses to emergencies may further amplify their operational consequences. (2) Execution Misalignment :existing decoupled scheduling systems often exhibit com-plex architectures and lengthy module dependency chains. When emergencies occur, it is difficult to rapidly identify the affected functional modules, which increases the risk that the decisions generated by LLMs may fail to align with the core logic of the scheduling system. Building on the above analysis, we propose the Multi-agent Driven Formal Instruction Generation Framework (MAFIG). Under emergency situations, MAFIG no longer performs reasoning and global modification over the entire scheduling system. Instead, it constrains its scope to the affected local functional modules, transfers the correspond-ing atomic functions into Formal Instructions, and achieves rapid repair through targeted modification of relevant atomic functions or the generation of new atomic functions. Specif-ically, MAFIG consists of a Perception Agent and an Emer-gency Decision Agent that operate collaboratively. To ad-dress the Latency-Quality Tradeoff, MAFIG introduces the span-focused loss-driven local distillation mechanism (SFL) to transfer the decision-making capability of powerful Cloud Large Language Models (C-LLMs) to lightweight local models. As a result, MAFIG substantially reduces inference latency while preserving decision-making effectiveness, satisfying the real-time requirements of highly dynamic and time-sensitive scheduling scenarios. To mitigate Execution Misalignment, MAFIG explicitly formalizes the processes of emergency perception, impact analysis, and function localization. The Perception Agent is responsible for the semantic parsing of emergency situations and the analysis of their impact. If emergency situations have a substantive impact on the current scheduling plan, the Perception Agent rapidly identifies the affected atomic functions and transfers them, along with the relevant emergency information, to the Emergency Decision Agent. Based on this information, the Emergency Decision Agent revises existing atomic func-tions or generates new ones, and then writes them into the atomic function library. Through this mechanism, MAFIG maintains continuous system operation and progressively improves its efficiency and adaptability in responding to similar emergency situations. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: (1) We analyze the limitations of existing decoupled schedul-ing systems in handling emergency situations, with particular emphasis on their limited ability to revise the core logical structure when functional modules fail. Furthermore, we identify two key challenges in the direct integration of Large Language Models into scheduling systems: Latency-Quality Tradeoff and Exe-cution Misalignment. (2) We propose the Multi-agent Driven Formal Instruction Generation Framework (MAFIG) for handling emergen-cies in scheduling systems. By combining collabora-tive multi-agent decision-making with the span-focused loss-driven local distillation mechanism (SFL), MAFIG enables rapid local repair of scheduling logic under emergency situations while reducing inference latency and preserving decision-making effectiveness. (3) We conduct systematic simulation experiments in three representative scenarios: Port, Warehouse, and Deck scheduling. The experimental results demonstrate that MAFIG significantly enhances the stability and adapt-ability of scheduling systems under diverse emergency situations. 

## 2. Related work 

2.1. Emergency Scheduling Systems 

To mitigate functional failures in scheduling systems caused by emergency situations, existing studies can gener-ally be classified into two categories: robust scheduling and   

> Shixing Zhao et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 2 of 13 Multi-agent Driven Formal Instruction Generation Framework

reactive scheduling. Robust scheduling mitigates the impact of potential emergency situations by estimating the prob-ability and impact of possible disturbances, incorporating time and resource buffers into the baseline schedule [22]. However, it is often criticized for being overly conservative, since protecting against events with a low probability usually comes at the expense of the initial objective value, such as a significant increase in the overall project makespan, which may be economically unjustifiable [23]. In contrast, reactive scheduling repairs the baseline schedule after emergency situations occur. It adapts the current plan to new conditions through local modification or global rescheduling. Its main advantage lies in strong task specificity, since it does not re-quire sacrificing system efficiency in advance. Nevertheless, delayed responses may allow their effects to spread rapidly across the scheduling network. Frequent rescheduling may also impose a considerable computational burden on the system [24]. Despite these efforts, existing approaches still suffer from a fundamental limitation. Emergencies in real-world scenarios are highly diverse, which makes it difficult for the original scheduling systems to fully account for potential emergency situations at the design stage [25, 26]. Consequently, relying on static buffering mechanisms or conventional rescheduling strategies is often insufficient to achieve efficient and stable system recovery in complex emergency environments. These limitations further moti-vate the study of intelligent emergency decision-making for complex scheduling systems, especially approaches that combine the powerful capability of LLMs with multi-agent collaboration. 

2.2. Application of LLMs in scheduling systems 

With the rapid development of artificial intelligence, par-ticularly in natural language processing (NLP) [27], Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated strong rea-soning and decision-making capabilities in code generation, code completion, and code repair [28–30]. Code-oriented LLMs, exemplified by Claude Code, Codex, and Code Llama, can already generate executable programs from nat-ural language descriptions. They have also achieved strong performance across multiple code benchmarks [31, 32]. These advances open a new technical pathway for handling emergency situations in complex scheduling systems. LLMs can parse emergency descriptions and participate in the modification of scheduling logic and code-level reconfig-uration. Recent studies in scheduling further indicate that, through task-specific data construction followed by fine-tuning, LLMs can be applied to combinatorial optimization problems such as job shop scheduling, where they show promising reasoning capability in dynamic scheduling sce-narios [33, 34]. The application of LLMs in decoupled scheduling sys-tems still faces critical challenges. Complex scheduling systems usually involve highly coupled functions, lengthy system contexts, and strict resource constraints. If code-oriented LLMs are directly used for code modification without task-specific adaptation or fine-tuning, they are easily distracted by long contexts, leading to insufficient use of critical information, biased understanding of local logic and myopic decision-making [35]. Recent studies further show that code-oriented LLMs may produce code hallucinations, namely code that appears plausible but is actually incorrect, including syntactic errors, logical errors, security vulnerabilities, and even erroneous modifications to existing programs [36]. Consequently, in strongly con-strained and highly coupled scheduling systems, modifica-tion with code-oriented LLMs is inherently risky. Without explicit constraints on domain rules, function structure, and edit boundaries, models may modify irrelevant code and undermine overall system consistency and executability. To mitigate these challenges, MAFIG precisely localizes the functional modules affected by emergency situations, which reduces interference from irrelevant context during model reasoning. It further introduces explicit domain rules and edit boundary constraints to ensure that the generated repair code remains strictly aligned with the core logic of the scheduling system. 

## 3. Methodology 

3.1. Framework Overview 

As illustrated in Fig. 2, MAFIG primarily consists of three components: the Perception Agent, the Emergency Decision Agent, and the atomic function library. To clearly describe how the framework handles emergency situations in complex and highly dynamic scheduling scenarios, the core variables involved are uniformly defined in Table 1. Constrained by the stringent response speed require-ments imposed by emergency situations 𝑒 𝑡 , MAFIG employs the span-focused loss-driven local distillation mechanism (SFL) to train efficient lightweight local models that instan-tiate the Perception Agent 𝐴 𝑃 and the Emergency Decision Agent 𝐴 𝐸 . When emergency situations 𝑒 𝑡 occur, 𝐴 𝑃 acquires the current system state 𝑠 𝑡 , the emergency situations 𝑒 𝑡 ,and the function specifications 𝑓 𝑠 . It performs semantic parsing and impact analysis of 𝑒 𝑡 to localize the affected functional modules 𝑎𝑓 𝑓 within the atomic function library. Subsequently, 𝐴 𝑃 forwards 𝑎𝑓 𝑓 , along with the contextual data of 𝑒 𝑡 , to the Emergency Decision Agent 𝐴 𝐸 . Based on this information, 𝐴 𝐸 revises the relevant atomic functions in 𝑎𝑓 𝑓 or generates new atomic functions when necessary. Through this process, MAFIG enables localized functional updates in the decoupled scheduling system under emer-gency situations, which supports rapid repair of scheduling logic and sustained stable system operation. 

3.2. Atomic Function Library 

To address the high coupling in traditional scheduling systems, we employ C-LLMs to perform modular decou-pling of complex scheduling logic. Given the aggregated system context 𝑥 , the C-LLMs autoregressively generate the atomic functions of each functional module and the corresponding function specifications 𝑓 𝑠 . The generation   

> Shixing Zhao et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 3 of 13

Multi-agent Driven Formal Instruction Generation Framework Function  library                 

> Function 1 :Master Scheduler
> Purpose :Generate an overall
> scheduling plan…
> Function 2 :Path Router
> Purpose :Plan the optimal paths
> for entities…
> Function 3 :Truck Allocator
> Purpose :Assign trucks to
> transport containers …
> GPT -5.2 Llama3 Claude Code Gemini Pro
> F 2  Finished
> F 5'
> F 3
> F 1 Input

.....              

> Vessel arrival delay Gantry crane breakdown Forklift breakdown
> Internal port road congestion Partial yard area unavailability
> Emergency Situations
> Yard crane malfunction
> Perception Agent
> Emergency Decision Agent
> Emergency information Scheduling plan
> Affects scheduling plan
> F 1
> F 4
> F 2
> Let ’ssolve this problem.
> Stage 1:clarify user demand …
> Stage 2:modify functions …
> Unreasonable
> Reasonable Function 5 '
> Add
> Scheduling System
> The current scheduling scenario is Port. Port has 12 berths, 8 gantry cranes…, with their current statuses as
> follows:… . Current scheduling plan involves 12 vessels. Vessel 1 is scheduled to arrive at 8:00, requiring 2
> hours for operations and 30 minutes of post -operation dwell time…
> Task Scenario

Function 5 Code  Emergency Information           

> Function 5 :Yard Manager
> Purpose :Distribute containers
> to yards…
> Other Tool Functions
> Purpose :Track real -time status
> of entities…
> Function 4 :Crane Scheduler
> Purpose :Allocate gantry cranes
> to vessels…

Normal Scheduling  Scheduling With Emergency situation      

> The code for the current function sis F1, F2, F3 …Their respective functions
> are… As a senior architect, your task is to refactor the code to achieve full
> decoupling , ensuring it aligns with the current scenario…

Figure 2: Architecture of MAFIG for emergency decision in scheduling systems. The framework consists of the Perception Agent, the Emergency Decision Agent and the Atomic Function Library. It supports semantic parsing, impact analysis, affected function localization and atomic function revision, which enables rapid recovery of scheduling logic under emergency situations. 

Table 1 

Description of variables and their corresponding meanings. Variable Description 

𝑡 Current time step 

𝑠 𝑡 Scheduling environment state at time 𝑡 𝑒 𝑡 Emergency situations at time 𝑡 𝑥 Aggregated system context (system rules, module specifications, code context) 

𝑓 𝑠 Function specifications 

𝐴 Atomic function library 

𝑎𝑓 𝑓 Atomic functions affected by 𝑒 𝑡 

𝐴 𝑃 Perception Agent 

𝐴 𝐸 Emergency Decision Agent 

process can be formally expressed as follows: 

𝑝 𝜃 𝐶 (𝑓 , 𝑓 𝑠 |𝑥 ) = ∏

𝑖 

𝑝 𝜃 𝐶 (𝑦 𝑖 |𝑥, 𝑦 1∶ 𝑖 −1 ), (1) where 𝜃 𝐶 denotes the parameters of the C-LLMs, and C-LLMs predict the current token 𝑦 𝑖 on the basis of the input context and the preceding 𝑖 − 1 tokens. The generated token sequence {𝑦 𝑖 } ultimately constitutes an independent atomic function 𝑓 and the corresponding function specifications 𝑓 𝑠 .The resulting atomic function library is defined as: 

𝐴 = { 𝑓 𝑚 }𝑀 𝑚 =1 + 𝑓 𝑠 , (2) where 𝑀 denotes the number of atomic functions. The atomic function library constructed through this process decomposes the complex scheduling system into a set of functionally explicit and relatively independent submodules. This decomposition provides a standardized interface that enables the Perception Agent 𝐴 𝑃 to precisely localize 𝑎𝑓 𝑓 

and allows the Emergency Decision Agent 𝐴 𝐸 to execute targeted modifications. 

3.3. Perception Agent 

Although existing Large Language Models exhibit strong decision-making capability in processing complex schedul-ing logic, their application for emergency handling still faces significant limitations. First, the inference latency of powerful C-LLMs is too high to satisfy the real-time requirements of emergency response in highly dynamic sce-narios, which leads to the Latency-Quality Tradeoff. Second, scheduling systems involve highly sensitive core data, so frequent interaction with cloud interfaces introduces severe privacy and security risks. As a consequence, we construct the Perception Agent 𝐴 𝑃 with a lightweight local model, and then employ distillation to transfer the emergency understanding and reasoning capabilities of the C-LLMs to 

𝐴 𝑃 . When emergency situations 𝑒 𝑡 occur, the Perception Agent 𝐴 𝑃 performs semantic parsing and impact analysis of 𝑒 𝑡 to rapidly localize the affected functional modules. This process improves the alignment between subsequent LLM decisions and the core logic of the scheduling system, thereby reducing the risk of Execution Misalignment. In this 

Shixing Zhao et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 4 of 13 Multi-agent Driven Formal Instruction Generation Framework 

process, the input to the Perception Agent is defined as: 

𝑧 𝑡 = 𝑔 (𝑒 𝑡 , 𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑓 𝑠 ), (3) where 𝑔 (⋅) denotes the feature aggregation function, which integrates the emergency situations 𝑒 𝑡 , the current environ-mental state 𝑠 𝑡 , and the function specifications 𝑓 𝑠 into a unified input representation. Conditioned on the input 𝑧 𝑡 , the Perception Agent 𝐴 𝑃 

computes the probability distribution over the atomic func-tions in 𝐴 that are affected by the emergency situations. This process establishes a mapping from the semantic space of the emergency situations to the corresponding code mod-ules: 

𝑎𝑓 𝑓 = { 𝑓 ∈ 𝐴 ∣ 𝑝 𝜃 𝑃 (𝑓 ∣ 𝑧 𝑡 ) > 𝜏 }, (4) where 𝜃 𝑃 denotes the parameters of the Perception Agent 

𝐴 𝑃 , 𝑝 𝜃 𝑃 (𝑓 ∣ 𝑧 𝑡 ) denotes the predicted probability that the atomic function 𝑓 is affected under the input 𝑧 𝑡 , and 𝜏 

represents the decision threshold. To overcome the limited localization capability caused by the small parameter scale of lightweight local models, we construct a high-quality emergency situations function localization dataset for distillation training. The Perception Agent 𝐴 𝑃 is optimized with the standard supervised cross-entropy loss: 

𝐴𝑃 (𝜃 𝑃 ) = − ∑ 

> 𝑓 ∈𝐴

𝑦 𝑃 (𝑓 ) log 𝑝 𝜃 𝑃 (𝑓 ∣ 𝑧 𝑡 ), (5) where 𝑦 𝑃 (𝑓 ) denotes the supervision label provided by the C-LLMs to indicate whether the atomic function 𝑓 is affected. 𝑝 𝜃 𝑃 (𝑓 ∣ 𝑧 𝑡 ) denotes the probability predicted by the Perception Agent that the atomic function 𝑓 is affected under the input 𝑧 𝑡 .By minimizing this cross-entropy loss, the Perception Agent 𝐴 𝑃 inherits the precise localization capability of the C-LLMs, while retaining the efficiency and privacy of local deployment. The resulting set of affected atomic functions 

𝑎𝑓 𝑓 and the relevant emergency information are transferred to the Emergency Decision Agent 𝐴 𝐸 , which provides the basis for subsequent code repair. 

3.4. Emergency Decision Agent 

Precise localization of the affected atomic functions 

𝑎𝑓 𝑓 by the Perception Agent 𝐴 𝑃 provides the foundation for repairing the affected core logic of the scheduling system. Compared with the semantic parsing and impact analysis performed by 𝐴 𝑃 , the Emergency Decision Agent 𝐴 𝐸 is responsible for code generation and logic reconstruction. Its training and inference are therefore substantially more demanding. Constrained by the limited computational resources available in local deployment, the Emergency Decision Agent 𝐴 𝐸 generally has a relatively small parameter scale. If the distillation stage requires 𝐴 𝐸 to learn global re-construction over lengthy functional module code, it is likely to waste its limited fitting capacity on unchanged background code, which leads to long-context forgetting and logical hallucinations. To mitigate this issue, we propose the span-focused loss-driven local distillation mechanism (SFL). While preserving the coherence of the complete code context, SFL assigns differentiated loss weights across code spans, which prevents the model from overfitting irrelevant background information, focusing the limited parameter capacity of 𝐴 𝐸 and generation capability on the targeted modification of critical code. Specifically, to train an efficient Emergency Decision Agent 𝐴 𝐸 , we construct the distillation dataset with a diff-based strategy. First, we use the C-LLMs with strong rea-soning capability as the teacher model. Conditioned on the integrated context 𝑧 𝑡 from the previous stage and the atomic function 𝑓 ∈ 𝑎𝑓 𝑓 to be revised, the teacher model generates the target function 𝑓 ∗ for handling the emergency situations: 

𝑓 ∗ = C-LLMs (𝑧 𝑡 , 𝑓 ), (6) Subsequently, we apply a diff-based strategy to compare the original function 𝑓 with the target function 𝑓 ∗, extract the modified code span between them. Let [𝑘, 𝑘 + 𝑚 ] denote the index span of the modified segment in 𝑓 ∗, which means that the subsequence satisfies 𝑓 ∗ 

> 𝑘 ∶𝑘 +𝑚

∉ 𝑓 . To construct supervised training data with explicit edit boundaries, we insert the special tokens <<EDIT_START>> and <<EDIT_END>> 

around the modified segment, constructing the final super-visory target sequence 𝑦 :

𝑦 = 𝑓 ∗1∶ 𝑘 −1 ⊕ «EDIT_START» ⊕ 𝑓 ∗

> 𝑘 ∶𝑘 +𝑚

⊕ «EDIT_END» ⊕ 𝑓 ∗ 

> 𝑘 +𝑚 +1∶ |𝑓 ∗|

, (7) where ⊕ denotes the sequence concatenation operation and 

|𝑓 ∗| denotes the total length of the target function. This for-mulation preserves the necessary code context while impos-ing explicit semantic focus on the modified region 𝑓 ∗

> 𝑘 ∶𝑘 +𝑚

.The resulting sequence 𝑦 is used as the supervision label for distillation training of the Emergency Decision Agent 𝐴 𝐸 .To further alleviate attention dispersion caused by the limited parameter scale of lightweight local models, we de-sign a span-weighted cross-entropy loss for the code editing task. We define the region enclosed by «EDIT_START» and  

> «EDIT_END»

in each training sample as the edit span. For an input sequence 𝑥 = { 𝑥 1, … , 𝑥 𝑇 }, we define a weight vector 

𝜔 ∈ ℝ𝑇 as follows: 

𝑤 𝑖 =

⎧⎪⎨⎪⎩

𝜆 edit if 𝑥 𝑖 ∈ Edit Span 

1 if 𝑥 𝑖 ∈ Normal Context 

0 if 𝑥 𝑖 ∈ Padding 

, (8) where 𝜆 edit is a hyperparameter, usually greater than 1,that reinforces learning of the edit region. The Emergency Decision Agent 𝐴 𝐸 is optimized by minimizing the weighted negative log likelihood loss: 

𝑀𝐴𝐹 𝐼𝐺 (𝜃 𝐸 ) = − 1

∑𝑇 𝑖 =1 𝑤 𝑖 

( 𝑇 ∑

> 𝑖 =1

𝑤 𝑖 log 𝑃 (𝑥 𝑖 ∣ 𝑥 <𝑖 ; 𝜃 𝐸 )

)  

> Shixing Zhao et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 5 of 13 Multi-agent Driven Formal Instruction Generation Framework

(9) A larger 𝜆 edit drives gradient updates toward modifications of the core logic of the atomic function, rather than routine syntactic patterns in the surrounding code. This design al-lows the Emergency Decision Agent 𝐴 𝐸 to preserve high-quality code generation capability for handling complex emergency situations under a limited parameter scale. When the revised atomic functions or newly generated atomic functions pass system trial execution, they are added to the atomic function library: 

𝐴 = 𝐴 ∪ 𝑓 new . (10) Continuous updating of the atomic function library not only supports rapid repair of scheduling logic under emer-gency situations, but also endows the scheduling system with self-evolution capability. As a result, the system can exhibit stronger robustness and adaptability when similar emergency situations arise in the future. Furthermore, to enable the model to accurately recog-nize the introduced special tokens, we extend the tokenizer by adding <<EDIT_START>> and <<EDIT_END>> to the vocabulary and expand the embedding matrix accordingly. However, direct random initialization of the embeddings for newly introduced tokens may disturb the original semantic space of the pretrained model and destabilize gradients during the early stage of training. To avoid this issue, we adopt a statistics-based initialization strategy. Let 𝑊 𝑒𝑚𝑏 ∈ ℝ𝑉 ×𝑑 

denote the original embedding matrix. We compute the mean 𝜇 𝑒𝑚𝑏 and variance 𝜎 2 

> 𝑒𝑚𝑏

of the existing token embed-dings, then initialize the embedding vector 𝑣 𝑛𝑒𝑤 of the newly introduced token 𝑡 𝑛𝑒𝑤 as: 

𝑣 𝑛𝑒𝑤 = 𝜇 𝑒𝑚𝑏 + 𝜖, 𝜖 ∼  (0 , 𝛾 ⋅ 𝜎 2

> 𝑒𝑚𝑏

), (11) where 𝛾 denotes a scaling factor and 𝜖 denotes a minor random perturbation. This initialization makes the newly introduced token embeddings statistically aligned with the existing embedding distribution, which reduces disturbance to the pretrained semantic space and improves optimization stability during the early stage of training. In summary, we introduces the atomic function library, the Perception Agent, and the Emergency Decision Agent. To provide a clear algorithmic description of MAFIG, we summarize its overall procedure in Algorithm 1. 

## 4. Experiments 

To systematically evaluate the proposed method in com-plex scheduling scenarios, we construct three simulation datasets by combining the operating mechanisms of real scheduling systems with representative patterns of emer-gency situations, namely port scheduling dataset EvalPort, warehouse scheduling dataset EvalWare and deck schedul-ing dataset EvalDeck. These datasets present progressively 

Algorithm 1 Procedure of MAFIG 

Require: Aggregated system context 𝑥 , scheduling envi-ronment state 𝑠 𝑡 , emergency situations 𝑒 𝑡 , Cloud Large Language Models (C-LLMs), and decision threshold 𝜏 

Ensure: Updated atomic function library 𝐴 for handling emergency situations  

> 1:

Atomic Function Library Construction:  

> 2:

Use C-LLMs to decouple the scheduling system into atomic functions.  

> 3:

Construct the atomic function library 𝐴 and the func-tion specifications 𝑓 𝑠 . 

> 4:

Perception Agent Training:  

> 5:

Construct the emergency situation localization dataset.  

> 6:

Train the Perception Agent 𝐴 𝑃 . 

> 7:

Emergency Decision Agent Training:  

> 8:

Construct the distillation dataset.  

> 9:

Extend the tokenizer with «EDIT_START» and «EDIT_END» . 

> 10:

Train the Emergency Decision Agent 𝐴 𝐸 . 

> 11:

Perception Agent Inference:  

> 12:

𝑧 𝑡 ← 𝑔 (𝑒 𝑡 , 𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑓 𝑠 ). 

> 13:

Compute 𝑝 𝜃 𝑃 (𝑓 ∣ 𝑧 𝑡 ) for each 𝑓 ∈ 𝐴 . 

> 14:

𝑎𝑓 𝑓 ← {𝑓 ∈ 𝐴 ∣ 𝑝 𝜃 𝑃 (𝑓 ∣ 𝑧 𝑡 ) > 𝜏 }. 

> 15:

Transfer 𝑎𝑓 𝑓 and the relevant emergency information to 𝐴 𝐸 . 

> 16:

Emergency Decision Agent Inference:  

> 17:

for all 𝑓 ∈ 𝑎𝑓 𝑓 do  

> 18:

Generate a revised function or new atomic function 

𝑓 new with 𝐴 𝐸 . 

> 19:

Validate 𝑓 new through system trial execution.  

> 20:

if 𝑓 new passes validation then  

> 21:

𝐴 ← 𝐴 ∪ { 𝑓 new }. 

> 22:

end if  

> 23:

end for  

> 24:

return 𝐴 

increasing levels of scenario dynamics, interaction com-plexity, and constraint stringency. The evaluation is con-ducted from five perspectives. (1) Overall emergency deci-sion performance of MAFIG across scenarios of increasing complexity. (2) Capacity of MAFIG to jointly mitigate the Latency-Quality Tradeoff and Execution Misalignment. (3) Performance of the MAFIG architecture across different lightweight local models. (4) Effectiveness of SFL. (5) Ad-vantages of SFL over conventional distillation methods in emergency decision tasks. 

4.1. Datasets 

EvalPort . Port terminals play a critical role in world trade as primary nodes connecting sea and land transporta-tion. Berth allocation is a core operation in terminal op-erations and directly affects subsequent resource alloca-tion, including yard management, equipment deployment, and workforce scheduling. For example, emergency situ-ations can continuously disrupt berth allocation and quay crane scheduling, which increases the demand for dynamic   

> Shixing Zhao et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 6 of 13

Multi-agent Driven Formal Instruction Generation Framework 

rescheduling in port operations [37]. On this basis, we con-struct EvalPort, which targets core tasks in port scheduling such as berth allocation and quay crane operations. The dataset contains a scheduling function library with eight core atomic functions, 30 localization samples for the Perception Agent and 80 distillation samples for the Emergency De-cision Agent. As shown in Fig. 3, the test set covers five categories of emergency situations and contains 199 test instances. Resource Unavail   

> Grid Failure
> Vessel ETA Adjust
> Task Duration Change
> Workpoint Adjust
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> Emergency Situations Counts  44 43 41
> 37
> 34

Figure 3: Overview of the EvalPort evaluation dataset. 

EvalWare . Compared with port scheduling scenarios, warehouse scheduling involves more frequent interactions among operational entities, denser task dependencies, and more intricate propagation paths of local disturbances. These characteristics impose higher requirements on the local re-planning capability of the model. Accordingly, EvalWare is constructed for warehouse scheduling scenarios, which covers path planning, dynamic storage location allocation, and coordinated execution of multiple tasks. The dataset contains a scheduling function library composed of 15 core atomic functions, 50 localization samples for the Percep-tion Agent and 170 distillation samples for the Emergency Decision Agent. As shown in Fig. 4, the test set contains 398 emergency instances drawn from eight categories of emergency situations. Stock Anomaly       

> Workpoint Adjust
> Forklift Adjust
> Zone Failure
> Truck Arrival Change
> Grid Failure
> Zone Capacity Change
> Forklift Failure
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> Emergency Situations Counts  54 53 53 52 50 48
> 45 43

Figure 4: Overview of the EvalWare evaluation dataset. 

EvalDeck . Carrier-based aircraft deck scheduling and support operations involve complex path planning, resource allocation, and temporal coordination. This scenario is char-acterized by severe space limitations, tightly coupled con-straints and dynamic disturbances [38], which make it the most structurally complex of the three scheduling scenarios. Accordingly, EvalDeck is constructed with a scheduling function library consisting of 25 core atomic functions, 100 localization samples for the Perception Agent, and 120 distillation samples for the Emergency Decision Agent. As illustrated in Fig. 5, the test set contains 642 emergency instances spanning 15 categories of emergency situations, which provides broader coverage of highly complex recon-figuration scenarios. In summary, EvalPort, EvalWare, and EvalDeck consti-tute a hierarchical evaluation benchmark for emergency han-dling in complex scheduling systems, with scenario dynam-ics, interaction complexity, and constraint intensity increas-ing progressively across the three datasets. This benchmark enables systematic evaluation of MAFIG in terms of func-tion localization, code repair, and scheduling reconstruction under different levels of scenario complexity. 

4.2. Experiment Setup 

During the distillation phase, SFL is used to enable efficient model distillation. Training is conducted in FP16 precision and the learning rate is initialized to 5 × 10 −5 . The model is trained for 3 epochs with a batch size of 4 and a LoRA rank of 8. AdamW is adopted as the optimizer, and the learning rate is controlled by a cosine scheduler. During the inference phase, Cloud Large Language Models (C-LLMs) are accessed through cloud APIs, with the generation parameters set to temperature = 0.9 and top-p = 0.95. Lightweight local models are deployed in a local GPU environment using vLLM. All experiments are conducted on a single NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU. For local inference, the maximum generation length is set to 2560 tokens, and GPU memory utilization is set to 0.9. 

4.3. Experimental Results 

To systematically validate the effectiveness of MAFIG in practical emergency scheduling scenarios, we compare MAFIG, using Qwen2.5-Coder-7B as the backbone model, against four large language models, namely Qwen3-32B [39], Qwen3-Coder-480B-A35B-Instruct, DeepSeek-V3.2 [40], and GLM-4.7 [41]. The experiments are conducted in port, warehouse, and deck scheduling scenarios, using total task completion time, average processing time, and task success rate as the evaluation metrics. The corresponding results are summarized in Table 2. Overall, as scenario complexity and constraint inten-sity increase, most large models exhibit a marked decline in task success rate while still incurring substantial infer-ence latency, which limits their suitability for emergency scheduling scenarios with stringent real-time response re-quirements. Specifically, GLM-4.7 achieves the best perfor-mance among all baselines, with success rates of 89.95% in the port scenario and 86.18% in the warehouse scenario. This result reflects the advantage of extensive prior knowledge and strong reasoning capability in complex scheduling tasks. 

Shixing Zhao et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 7 of 13 Multi-agent Driven Formal Instruction Generation Framework Air Cart Failure              

> Oxygen Cart Failure
> Power Cart Adjust
> Maint Cart Failure
> Fixed Res Failure
> Grid Failure
> Fire Engine Adjust
> Mobile Res Failure
> N2 Cart Adjust
> Aircraft Arrival Change
> Fuel Truck  Failure
> Workpoint Adjust
> Hydraulic Adjust
> Tractor Adjust
> Towing Adjust
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> Emergency Situations Counts  51
> 48 48 47 45 44 43 43 42 41 40 39 37 37 37

Figure 5: Overview of the EvalDeck evaluation datasets. 

However, its average processing times still reach 27.44 s and 40.75 s. These results indicate that Large Language Models still suffer from the pronounced Latency-Quality Tradeoff in scheduling tasks. Moreover, large-scale models are generally difficult to deploy directly in local scheduling systems and must therefore be accessed through cloud APIs in practical applications. The communication overhead introduced by remote invocation further increases overall response latency. In scheduling scenarios, when emergency situations are not handled promptly, local disturbances tend to propagate and amplify, which makes stable system operation difficult to sustain. Therefore, relying solely on C-LLMs cannot si-multaneously satisfy the dual requirements of high-quality decision-making and rapid response in complex scheduling systems. In contrast, MAFIG requires only 0.33 s and 0.23 s on average in the port and warehouse scenarios, while achieving success rates of 98.49% and 94.97%, respectively. It thus outperforms C-LLMs in both decision quality and response efficiency. These results show that MAFIG can substantially reduce inference latency while maintaining a higher task success rate, thereby effectively alleviating the Latency-Quality Tradeoff in emergency scheduling tasks. This advantage arises from the proposed SFL, which enables the lightweight local model to inherit effective knowledge and decision patterns from C-LLMs for emergency handling. As a result, the lightweight local model preserves high inference efficiency while retaining the decision capability required for emergency handling. Moreover, with the growth of scenario complexity and constraint intensity, Execution Misalignment during C-LLMs inference becomes increasingly evident. This issue is par-ticularly severe in the deck scenario, where module inter-actions are the most complex and operational constraints are the strongest. As reported in Table 2, although Qwen3-Coder-480B-A35B-Instruct and DeepSeek-V3 (685B) have substantially larger parameter scales, their success rates are only 51.40% and 50.93%, respectively, both markedly lower than the 83.49% achieved by GLM-4.7 (358B). This result indicates that performance in complex scheduling tasks is not determined solely by parameter scale. Although larger models possess richer prior knowledge, they are also more likely to exhibit overly broad knowledge invocation and divergent reasoning paths under complex emergency situations, which makes it difficult to rapidly localize the key functional modules genuinely affected by the emergency situations. When localization fails, the decisions generated by global reasoning are more likely to deviate from the internal constraints and execution paths of the system, which ultimately reduces the overall task success rate. In contrast, MAFIG no longer performs reasoning and global modifica-tion over the entire scheduling system. Instead, it confines repair to the affected atomic functions and achieves rapid functional adjustment through targeted repair. Benefiting from this mechanism, MAFIG attains a success rate of 97.50% in the deck scenario, with an average processing time of only 0.19 s. These results demonstrate that, compared with approaches relying solely on C-LLMs with massive parameter scales, the localized repair paradigm of MAFIG can more effectively suppress the risk of Execution Mis-alignment in complex decoupled scheduling systems, while preserving both decision-making accuracy and response efficiency. 

4.4. Effectiveness Evaluation of the MAFIG Architecture 

To evaluate the effectiveness of the MAFIG architec-ture, we select three open-source small models as the back-bones of the Perception Agent and the Emergency Deci-sion Agent, namely Qwen2.5-Coder-7B, Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct, and GLM-4-9B-Chat. In this experiment, the original small models are directly integrated into MAFIG, so that the contribution of the architecture itself can be 

Shixing Zhao et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 8 of 13 Multi-agent Driven Formal Instruction Generation Framework                                                           

> Table 2
> Performance comparison of different models across tasks.
> Task Models Total Time (s) Avg Time (s) Success Rate
> Port Qwen3-32B 1763.73 8.86 62.31% Qwen3-Coder-480B-A35B-Instruct 896.53 4.51 85.93% DeepSeek-V3.2 1827.28 9.18 86.43% GLM-4.7 5460.58 27.44 89.95% Qwen2.5-Coder-7B 69.20 0.35 25.62%
> MAFIG(Qwen2.5-Coder-7B) 64.98 0.33 98.49%
> Warehousing Qwen3-32B 6716.86 16.88 75.38% Qwen3-Coder-480B-A35B-Instruct 1657.91 4.17 83.17% DeepSeek-V3.2 5134.66 12.90 83.67% GLM-4.7 16217.18 40.75 86.18% Qwen2.5-Coder-7B 151.18 0.38 25.87%
> MAFIG(Qwen2.5-Coder-7B) 90.27 0.23 94.97%
> Deck Qwen3-32B 8300.60 12.93 50.62% Qwen3-Coder-480B-A35B-Instruct 2646.40 4.12 51.40% DeepSeek-V3.2 8753.61 13.63 50.93% GLM-4.7 20582.86 32.06 83.49% Qwen2.5-Coder-7B 250.13 0.39 17.45%
> MAFIG(Qwen2.5-Coder-7B) 119.87 0.19 97.50%

examined independently of the proposed distillation mech-anism. As reported in Table 3, three lightweight models achieve substantial improvements in task success rate after deployment in MAFIG across the port, warehouse, and deck scenarios, while the average processing time is also significantly reduced. In contrast, the original small models exhibit generally low task success rates in the three sce-narios, and their performance declines further as scenario complexity increases. For example, in the port scenario, the success rates of Qwen2.5-Coder-7B and GLM-4-9B-Chat are only 25.62% and 23.62%, respectively. In the more com-plex deck scenario, the success rates of Qwen2.5-Coder-7B and Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct further decrease to 17.45% and 10.90%. These results indicate that, when confronted with emergency situations, the original models must infer and revise the complete scheduling logic directly from the emergency description. This setting is easily affected by the broad task scope, the numerous constraints, and the complex generation space, which makes satisfactory decision-making difficult. In contrast, MAFIG transforms the originally complex problem of global scheduling reconstruction into a repair problem over local functional modules. It no longer requires the model to perform reasoning and global modifications over the entire scheduling system, which effectively reduces task difficulty and improves the task success rate of the orig-inal small models. In the warehouse scenario, the success rate of GLM-4-9B-Chat increases from 36.18% to 69.10%. Notably, in the most complex deck scenario, the success rate of Qwen2.5-Coder-7B still improves from 17.45% to 48.91%. Beyond the improvement in success rate, MAFIG also enhances task processing efficiency. As shown in Table 3, in the deck scenario, the average processing time of Qwen2.5-Coder-7B is reduced from 0.39 s to 0.16 s, while Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct decreases from 0.70 s to 0.12 s. This improvement arises because MAFIG confines the decision scope to the affected local atomic functions, which substan-tially reduces the additional reasoning overhead introduced by irrelevant context and therefore shortens the overall pro-cessing time for emergency handling. 

4.5. Effectiveness Evaluation of SFL 

Building on the preceding validation of the MAFIG architecture, this section further examines the contribution of SFL to the overall performance of the proposed method. Specifically, we compare MAFIG with MAFIG (w/o SFL) in terms of task success rate and processing efficiency across the three scenarios, and report the corresponding results in Table 4. Across the three scenarios, MAFIG (w/o SFL) achieves success rates of 62.81%, 55.53%, and 48.91%, respectively. Although the MAFIG architecture yields sub-stantial performance gains for small models, the knowledge capacity, reasoning depth, and capabilities of these small models in complex decision tasks remain limited by their parameter scale. After applying SFL, the success rates rise further to 98.49%, 94.97%, and 97.50%, respectively. These results indicate that SFL can effectively transfer the knowl-edge and decision patterns exhibited by C-LLMs to small models during emergency understanding, logical reasoning, and decision generation. As a result, the lightweight lo-cal models acquire stronger decision-making capability and achieve higher repair accuracy under complex constraints. Notably, although the deck scenario involves higher task complexity and has only 120 training samples, fewer than the 170 samples used in the warehouse scenario, MAFIG still achieves a success rate of 97.50%, exceeding the 94.97%   

> Shixing Zhao et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 9 of 13

Multi-agent Driven Formal Instruction Generation Framework 

Table 3 

Evaluating the Effect of MAFIG Architecture on Backbone Model Performance. 

Task Model Method Total Time (s) Avg Time (s) Success Rate 

Port Qwen2.5-Coder-7B — 69.20 0.35 25.62% Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct — 101.39 0.51 30.15% GLM-4-9B-Chat — 94.89 0.48 23.62% Qwen2.5-Coder-7B MAFIG(w/o SFL) 63.19 0.32 62.81% Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct MAFIG(w/o SFL) 71.06 0.36 48.24% GLM-4-9B-Chat MAFIG(w/o SFL) 86.11 0.43 64.82% 

Warehousing Qwen2.5-Coder-7B — 151.18 0.38 25.87% Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct — 407.56 1.02 30.15% GLM-4-9B-Chat — 186.05 0.47 36.18% Qwen2.5-Coder-7B MAFIG(w/o SFL) 87.87 0.22 55.53% Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct MAFIG(w/o SFL) 101.55 0.26 40.45% GLM-4-9B-Chat MAFIG(w/o SFL) 136.39 0.34 69.10% 

Deck Qwen2.5-Coder-7B — 250.13 0.39 17.45% Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct — 449.40 0.70 10.90% GLM-4-9B-Chat — 328.78 0.51 24.45% Qwen2.5-Coder-7B MAFIG(w/o SFL) 103.97 0.16 48.91% 

Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct MAFIG(w/o SFL) 79.66 0.12 31.35% GLM-4-9B-Chat MAFIG(w/o SFL) 125.01 0.19 42.37% 

Table 4 

Latency and Success Rate Analysis of MAFIG With Versus Without SFL Across Different Tasks.                                                        

> Task Model Method Perception Time (s) Decision Time (s) Total Time (s) Avg Time (s) Accuracy
> Port Qwen2.5-Coder-7B ———69.20 0.35 25.62% MAFIG(w/o SFL) 18.25 44.94 63.19 0.32 62.81%
> MAFIG 18.63 46.35 64.98 0.33 98.49%
> Warehousing Qwen2.5-Coder-7B ———151.18 0.38 25.87% MAFIG(w/o SFL) 23.02 64.85 87.87 0.22 55.53%
> MAFIG 22.08 68.19 90.27 0.23 94.97%
> Deck Qwen2.5-Coder-7B ———250.13 0.39 17.45% MAFIG(w/o SFL) 31.30 72.67 103.97 0.16 48.91%
> MAFIG 31.40 88.47 119.87 0.19 97.50%

achieved in the warehouse scenario. This result indicates that distillation effectiveness is not determined solely by the number of training samples, but is also closely related to the distribution characteristics of emergency situations across scenarios. As shown in Fig. 5, the deck scenario contains a greater variety of emergency situations than the warehouse scenario. Nevertheless, the corresponding decision adjust-ments are typically concentrated on several critical func-tional modules. This characteristic facilitates the learning of representative handling patterns. Furthermore, SFL en-ables the small model to more effectively learn the decision patterns exhibited by large models in these recurrent critical cases, which explains why high accuracy is preserved even in the more complex scenario. 

4.6. Scenario Applicability Analysis of SFL 

To further evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed SFL in emergency decision tasks, we construct training sets of different sizes with multiple categories of emergency situations across the port, warehouse and deck scenarios. We select Qwen2.5-Coder-7B as the backbone model to compare SFL with conventional LoRA fine-tuning. As shown in Fig. 6, under limited training data, con-ventional LoRA achieves only modest performance gains, whereas SFL exhibits more stable and consistent improve-ments. In the port scenario, when the training set contains only 60 samples, LoRA achieves a success rate of 84.82%, while SFL already reaches 90.45%. When the training set is increased to 70 samples, the success rate of SFL fur-ther rises to 95.97%, which remains clearly higher than the 90.97% obtained by LoRA. This result indicates that, under limited training data, SFL explicitly identifies the true edited regions through a diff-based strategy and reinforces the supervision signal on critical modification segments with a span-weighted cross-entropy loss function, enabling the model to concentrate on the code adjustment patterns that are genuinely required for emergency handling. In contrast, conventional LoRA typically optimizes the entire output sequence in a uniform manner. In emergency scheduling reconstruction tasks, the actual learning target is often con-fined to a local modification region within a function, while 

Shixing Zhao et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 10 of 13 Multi-agent Driven Formal Instruction Generation Framework 60 70 80 100           

> Training Set Size
> 65%
> 70%
> 75%
> 80%
> 85%
> 90%
> 95%
> 100%
> Success Rate
> Port
> 100 130 150 170
> Training Set Size
> 65%
> 70%
> 75%
> 80%
> 85%
> 90%
> 95%
> 100% Warehousing
> 75 90 120 150
> Training Set Size
> 65%
> 70%
> 75%
> 80%
> 85%
> 90%
> 95%
> 100% Deck
> Baseline (Lora-loss) MAFIG (Ours) Performance Gain

Figure 6: Performance comparison of SFL and LoRA under different training set sizes across tasks. Emergency description : In the aircraft carrier deck scheduling system, the position of hydraulic vehicle No. 2 is adjusted to (0, 1), maintenance 

> vehicle No. 5 becomes unavailable due to a failure, oxygen -supply vehicle No. 3 becomes unavailable due to a failure, an explosi on occurs in the
> area covering positions (8, 5), (9, 5), (8, 6), and (9, 6).

Request Processing Steps Users 

Perception Agent 

Emergency 

Decision Agent                     

> Extract Emergency Information
> 1. Hydraulic #2 pos → (0,1)
> 2. FAILURE :Maint #5, Oxygen #3
> 3. BLAST ZONE :Grid (8,5) -(9,6) is inaccessible.
> Prompt 1 :You are a senior expert in information processing and system diagnosis. Your task is to analyze the
> “emergency situations description, extract the effective information contained in the event, and determine
> whether it affects the current scheduling plan …
> Analyze Emergency Situation
> 1. Obtain the current scheduling plan
> 2. Analyze whether emergency situations
> will affect the scheduling plan
> Prompt 2 :You are an expert in emergency response and scheduling system reconfiguration. Your task is to
> apply the minimal necessary changes to the existing scheduling code under given emergency situations. If
> no suitable function exists for modification, you are allowed to generate a new atomic function …
> Functions library
> hydraulic vehicle refueling truck
> oxygen vehicle router planning
> nitrogen vehicle …
> Re -execute the scheduling system
> Modified Functions

Output Response Result 

Rescheduling planning  MAED Decision Logs 

Figure 7: Case study of MAFIG in the deck scheduling scenario under concurrent emergency situations. 

unchanged contextual code still accounts for the majority of the sequence. Consequently, LoRA tends to disperse parameter updates over irrelevant background code, which weakens learning of the core modification logic. As scenario complexity increases, the advantage of SFL becomes more pronounced. In the warehouse scenario, when the training set contains 100 samples, SFL improves the success rate from 87.68% under LoRA to 92.96%. This result shows that SFL can still maintain stable performance gains in scenarios with more complex interactions and more numerous constraints. The underlying reason is that, in com-plex scenarios with diverse emergency situations, SFL is more suited to concentrate learning on the effective mod-ification regions. If the full-sequence average optimization used by LoRA is retained, the model is more easily affected by redundant contextual information. A similar trend can also be observed in the deck scenario. When the training set contains only 75 samples, SFL achieves a success rate of 75.38%, exceeding the 69.00% obtained by LoRA. When the training set is increased to 90 samples, the success rate of SFL further rises to 89.40%, whereas LoRA reaches only 81.31%. 

4.7. Case Study 

To further validate the practical effectiveness of MAFIG under highly dynamic scenarios with multiple constraints, we conduct a case study on deck scheduling, which is the most structurally complex of the three scenarios. The case study shows that MAFIG can precisely localize the affected atomic functions and perform code repair under multiple concurrent emergency situations, which reduces the risk of Execution Misalignment in complex decoupled systems. As illustrated in Fig. 7, the system receives the follow-ing unstructured emergency description: “Hydraulic vehicle No. 2 is adjusted to (0 , 1) , maintenance vehicle No. 5 and oxygen supply vehicle No. 3 become unavailable due to failures, and an explosion occurs in the grid region spanning 

(8 , 5) to (9 , 6) .” Upon receiving these instructions, MAFIG 

Shixing Zhao et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 11 of 13 Multi-agent Driven Formal Instruction Generation Framework 

invokes the Perception Agent to perform semantic parsing, extract heterogeneous emergency factors, and assess their substantive impact on the current scheduling plan. If the current plan is determined to be affected, the Perception Agent rapidly localizes the relevant functional modules in the function library and transfers them, along with the emer-gency information, to the Emergency Decision Agent. The Emergency Decision Agent then applies the minimum nec-essary modifications to the relevant core code. Finally, the system produces an executable rescheduling solution and adds the validated atomic functions to the atomic function library, which repairs the scheduling logic and supports continued adaptive evolution. 

## 5. Conclusion 

In this paper, we propose the Multi-agent Driven For-mal Instruction Generation Framework (MAFIG), which constrains repair to locally affected atomic functions. The framework comprises a Perception Agent and an Emergency Decision Agent, and SFL transfers the emergency handling capability of Cloud Large Language Models to lightweight local models, reducing response time in emergency situa-tions while preserving high decision-making quality. Sim-ulation experiments in port, warehouse, and deck schedul-ing scenarios demonstrate that MAFIG consistently outper-forms multiple powerful Cloud Large Language Models. 

## Acknowledgments 

This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos.62325602, 62506342), Henan Provincial Natural Science Foundation Youth Cat-egory B Project (Grant No.262300421217), Postgraduate Education Research Project of Zhengzhou University (Grant No.YJSJY2025138), the China Postdoctoral Science Foun-dation (Grant No.2025M781527). 

## References 

[1] G. Chen, J. Zhang, M. Ning, W. Cui, M. Ma, Task scheduling in real-time industrial scenarios, Comput. Ind. Eng. (2023) 109372. [2] A. Agnetis, J.-C. Billaut, M. Pinedo, D. Shabtay, Fifty years of research in scheduling — Theory and applications, European Journal of Operational Research (2025) 367–393. [3] D. Ouelhadj, S. Petrovic, A survey of dynamic scheduling in manu-facturing systems, Journal of Scheduling (2009) 417–431. [4] J. Lu, W. Li, J. Guo, X. Ding, Z. Tang, T. Wang, W. Jia, Hybrid learning for cold-start-aware microservice scheduling in dynamic edge environments, IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing (2025) 1–16. [5] L. Liu, Z. Xu, X. Qu, A reconfigurable architecture for industrial control systems: Overview and challenges, Machines (2024) 793. [6] J. M. Framinan, R. Leisten, R. Ruiz, Architecture of manufacturing scheduling systems: Literature review and an integrated proposal, European Journal of Operational Research 205 (2010) 237–246. [7] N. M. Sadeh, D. W. Hildum, T. J. Laliberty, J. McA’Nulty, D. Kjenstad, A. Tseng, A blackboard architecture for integrating pro-cess planning and production scheduling, Concurrent Engineering: Research and Applications 6 (1998) 88–100. [8] S. F. Smith, Reactive scheduling systems, Intelligent Scheduling Systems, Kluwer Academic Publishers (1994) 155–192. [9] M. Marino, L. Cavallaro, E. Castro, R. E. Musumeci, M. Martignoni, F. Roman, E. Foti, Analysis on a database of ship accidents in port areas, Data in Brief (2023) 109127. [10] M. Ghaleb, H. Zolfagharinia, S. Taghipour, Real-time production scheduling in the Industry-4.0 context: Addressing uncertainties in job arrivals and machine breakdowns, Computers & Operations Re-search (2020) 105031. [11] W. Herroelen, R. Leus, Project scheduling under uncertainty: Survey and research potentials, European Journal of Operational Research (2005) 289–306. [12] G. E. Vieira, J. W. Herrmann, E. Lin, Adaptive production reschedul-ing for managing unforeseen emergency situations, Proceedings of the 2003 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (2003) 4011–4016. [13] H. Abgaryan, G. Harutyunyan, T. Cazenave, LLMs can schedule, arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06993, 2024. [14] M. Tang, C. Bian, L. Yang, X. Zhong, Key-concept thinking prompt-ing for improved reasoning in large language models, Neurocomput-ing 656 (2025) 130986. [15] X. Li, X. Zhou, J. Li, B. Fan, Retrieval-augmented LLM-driven multi-agent optimization framework for intelligent manufacturing schedul-ing, in: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications , 2025. [16] D. Chen, S. Zhang, F. Gao, Y. Zhuang, S. Tang, Q. Liu, M. Xu, Logic distillation: learning from code function by function for decision-making tasks, in: Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2025, pp. 7338–7346. [17] S. Brahmachary, S. M. Joshi, A. Panda, K. Koneripalli, A. K. Sagotra, H. Patel, A. Sharma, A. D. Jagtap, K. Kalyanaraman, Large language model-based evolutionary optimizer: Reasoning with elitism, Neuro-computing 622 (2025) 129272. [18] T. B. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, et al., Language models are few-shot learners, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33 (2020) 1877–1901. [19] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, et al., Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models, Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems 35 (2022) 24824–24837. [20] T. Kojima, S. Gu, M. Reid, Y. Matsuo, Y. Iwasawa, Large language models are zero-shot reasoners, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (2022) 22199–22213. [21] D. Chen, F. Gao, S. Zhang, Y. Zhuang, S. Tang, Q. Liu, H. Wang, X. Yang, M. Xu, Improving large models with small models: Lower costs and better performance, Neural Netw. (2025) 108276. [22] E. Demeulemeester, W. Herroelen, Robust Project Scheduling, Found. Trends Technol. Inf. Oper. Manag. 3(3-4) (2009) 201–376. [23] T. Portoleau, C. Artigues, R. Guillaume, Robust Predictive-Reactive Scheduling: An Information-Based Decision Tree Model, in: Infor-mation Processing and Management of Uncertainty in Knowledge-Based Systems, CCIS 1239, Springer, Cham, 2020, pp. 479–492. [24] W. Herroelen, R. Leus, Robust and reactive project scheduling: A review and classification of procedures, Int. J. Prod. Res. 42(8) (2004) 1599–1620. [25] G. Chai, J. Cao, W. Huang, J. Guo, Optimized traffic emergency resource scheduling using time varying rescue route travel time, 

Neurocomputing 275 (2018) 1567–1575. [26] P. Jędrzejowicz, E. Ratajczak-Ropel, Reinforcement Learning strate-gies for A-Team solving the Resource-Constrained Project Scheduling Problem, Neurocomputing 146 (2014) 301–307. [27] J. Wen, D. Liu, Y. Xie, Y. Ren, J. Wang, Y. Xia, P. Zhu, AcuGPT-Agent: An LLM-powered intelligent system for acupuncture-based infertility treatment, Neurocomputing 652 (2025) 131116. [28] D. Chen, Y. Zhuang, S. Zhang, J. Liu, S. Dong, S. Tang, Data shunt: Collaboration of small and large models for lower costs and better performance, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 38, no. 10, 2024, pp. 11249–11257. [29] D. Chen, Z. Hu, P. Fan, Y. Zhuang, Y. Li, Q. Liu, X. Jiang, M. Xu, Kka: Improving vision anomaly detection through anomaly-related knowl-edge from large language models, arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14880, 

Shixing Zhao et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 12 of 13 Multi-agent Driven Formal Instruction Generation Framework 

2025. [30] W. Huang, J. Pan, Z. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, S. Shen, J. Hu, Enhancing multimodal large language models with efficient feature alignment and processing using state space models, Neurocomputing 

665 (2026) 132152. [31] M. Chen, J. Tworek, H. Jun, Q. Yuan, H. P. de Oliveira Pinto, J. Kaplan, H. Edwards, Y. Burda, N. Joseph, G. Brockman, et al., Evaluating Large Language Models Trained on Code, arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 (2021). [32] B. Rozière, J. Gehring, F. Gloeckle, S. Sootla, I. Gat, X. E. Tan, Y. Adi, J. Liu, R. Sauvestre, T. Remez, et al., Code Llama: Open Foundation Models for Code, arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950 (2023). [33] H. Abgaryan, T. Cazenave, A. Harutyunyan, Starjob: Dataset for LLM-driven Job Shop Scheduling, arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.01877 (2025). [34] J. An, H. Cai, Y. Zhao, X. Gui, X. He, X. Jin, JSHM: A dynamic flex-ible job-shop scheduling method with human-machine collaboration, 

Neurocomputing 666 (2026) 132213. [35] S. Cao, Y. Yuan, ReflecSched: Solving Dynamic Flexible Job-Shop Scheduling via LLM-Powered Hierarchical Reflection, arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.01724 (2025). [36] V. Agarwal, Y. Pei, S. Alamir, X. Liu, CodeMirage: Hallucina-tions in Code Generated by Large Language Models, arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08333 (2024). [37] F. Rodrigues, A. Agra, Berth allocation and quay crane assign-ment/scheduling problem under uncertainty: A survey, Eur. J. Oper. Res. 303(2) (2022) 501–524. [38] X. Wang, J. Liu, X. Su, H. Peng, X. Zhao, C. Lu, A review on carrier aircraft dispatch path planning and control on deck, Chin. J. Aeronaut. 33(12) (2020) 3039–3057. [39] Qwen Team, Qwen3 technical report, arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388, 2025. [40] DeepSeek-AI, DeepSeek-V3.2: Pushing the frontier of open large language models, arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.02556, 2025. [41] A. Zeng, B. Liu, R. Zheng, B. Zhang, F. Du, Z. Lu, Z. Lai, T. Ni, C. Shen, Y. Ding, et al., ChatGLM: A family of large lan-guage models from GLM-130B to GLM-4 all tools, arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12793, 2024. 

Shixing Zhao et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 13 of 13