Title: Energy-Arena

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.24705v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Apr 2026 02:17:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
Energy -Arena:  A Dynamic Benchmark for 

# Operational Energy Forecasting 

Max Kleinebrahm¹, Jonathan Berrisch², Philipp Eiser¹, Wolf Fichtner¹, Veit Hagenmeyer³, Matthias Hertel³, Nils Koster⁴, Sebas tian 

Lerch⁵˒⁶, Ralf Mikut³, Jan Priesmann⁷, Melanie  Schienle⁴˒⁵, Benjamin Schäfer³, Jann Weinand⁸, Florian Ziel² 

¹ Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Institute for Industrial Production, Karlsruhe, Germany 

² University of Duisburg -Essen, House of Energy Markets and Finance, Essen, Germany 

³ Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Institute for Automation and Applied Informatics, Eggenstein -Leopoldshafen, Germany 

⁴ Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Institute of Statistics, Karlsruhe, Germany 

⁵ Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical Studies, Heidelberg, Germany 

⁶ Marburg University, Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Marburg, Germany 

⁷ Volatile GmbH, Cologne, Germany 

⁸ Forschungszentrum  Jülich GmbH, Institute of Climate and Energy Systems  – Jülich Systems Analysis, Jülich, Germany 

Abstract  — Energy forecasting research faces a persistent 

comparability gap that makes it difficult to measure consistent 

progress over time. Reported accuracy gains are often not 

directly comparable because models are evaluated under study -

specific datasets, time pe riods, information  sets , and scoring 

setups, while widely used benchmarks and competition datasets 

are typically tied to fixed historical windows. This paper 

introduces the Energy -Arena, a dynamic benchmarking platform 

for operational energy tim e series forecasting that provides  a

continuously updated  reference point as  energy systems  evolve. 

The platform operates as an  open, API -based submission system 

and standardizes challenge definitions and submission deadlines 

aligned with operational constraints.  Performance is reported  on 

rolling evaluation windows via persistent leaderboards.  By 

moving from retrospective backtesting to  forward -looking 

benchmarking , the Energy -Arena  enforces standardized ex -ante 

submission and ex -post evaluation,  thereby  improving 

transparency by preventing information leakage and retroactive 

tuning.  The platform is publicly  available  at  Energy -Arena.org .

Index Terms  — Benchmarking, Electricity price forecasting, 

Energy forecasting, Load forecasting, Renewable energy 

forecasting 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

Forecasting electricity prices, load, and renewable 

generation has become essential for power system operators, 

energy traders, and analysts as renewable penetration and 

market volatility rise across Europe, a trend reflected in the 

sharp growth of related  research, including more than  2,400 

papers published in 202 5 alone  (see  Fig. 1 ).

Figure  1. Increase in the annual number of energy forecasting publications 

indexed in Scopus from 2010 to 2025  (similar to  [3] ).  The analysis is based on 

TITLE -ABS -KEY searches using a symmetric proximity structure: Wind: 

(("wind" W/3 ("power" OR "generation")) W/3 (forecast* OR predict*)); 

Solar: ((("solar" OR "photovoltaic" OR "PV") W/3 ("power" OR 

"generation")) W/3 (forecast* OR  predict*)); Price: ((("electricity" OR 

"power") W/3 "price") W/3 (forecast* OR predict*)); Load: ((("electricity" OR 

"power") W/3 ("load" OR "demand")) W/3 (forecast* OR predict*)).  W/3 

denotes a proximity operator requiring that the specified terms oc cur within 

three words of each other in the given order.  All queries were restricted to 

document types Article or Review (DOCTYPE(ar OR re)).  Code for figure 

reproduction .

Despite a vast body of literature and notable open -access 

efforts  e.g., Refs.  [1], [2] , the field lacks a widely accepted, 

continuously updated  dynamic  benchmark that captures the evolving conditions of modern  energy systems . As a result, it 

remains difficult to assess state -of -the -art forecasting 

performance, hindering consistent and measurable progress, 

both in research and in commercial practice. 

Most research papers rely on study -specific benchmark 

datasets, evaluation metrics, and experimental designs, which 

enable intra -study model comparisons but limit inter -study 

comparability. Even when addressing the same target variable, 

such as day -ahead e lectricity prices, models are evaluated on 

different time periods, market zones, preprocessing pipelines, 

and information sets  [4] . As a result, reported performance 

differences often reflect experimental design choices rather 

than methodological advances.  In addition, model 

comparisons may be affected by implementation choices and 

tuning effort. In practice, competing methods are not always 

implemented or optimized with equal care, for example with 

respect to feature engineering or hyperparameter selection.  As 

noted by Hewamalage  et al.  [5] , this can lead to misleading 

conclusions when state -of -the -art methods are compared under 

suboptimal configurations. As a result, reported performance 

differences may reflect differences in implementation quality 

rather than inherent methodological advant ages. 

Important efforts have been made to address this issue. In 

particular, Lago  et al.  [1]  introduce a comprehensive open -

access  electricity price forecasting  benchmark dataset covering 

five electricity markets, six years of data per market, 

standardized training and testing splits, and clearly defined 

evaluation protocols. Their framework substantially improves 

transparency and comparability by ensuring multi -market 

coverage, sufficiently long out -of -sample periods, and the 

inclusion of relevant day -ahead exogenous forecasts. 

Nevertheless, such benchmarks remain inherently static: once 

publishe d, the dataset reflects a fixed historical period. In 

rapidly evolving energy systems characterized by increasing 

renewable penetration, structural shifts in bidding behavior, 

and regulatory changes, forecasting performance is highly 

time -dependent. A meth od that performs best on data from 

2011 –2018 may not remain competitive under current market 

conditions. 

Beyond dataset heterogeneity, experimental designs are 

often underspecified with respect to the information structure 

assumed at forecast issuance.  Some studies implicitly assume 

access to exogenous regressors that would not have been 

publicly available at gate closure.  For example  [6], [7], [8]  use 

wind and solar generation forecasts  from the  European 

Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity 

(ENTSO -E) [9]  as input features for day -ahead price 

prediction.  However, the publicly available day -ahead wind 

and solar forecasts are released only after 18:00 on the day 

before delivery, whereas the day -ahead market already closes 

at 12:00 on that day  [9] . Their use therefore presumes that 

comparable wind and solar forecasts are available to market 

participants before gate closure, although this assumption is 

typically not formalized explicitly.  This highlights the broader 

distinction between operational (ex -ante) forecasting models, 

which must rely only on information available at the forecast 

issuance time, and ex -post explanatory models that may 

incorporate variables observed later.  As the publicly available 

ENTSO -E forecasts are released only after the  auction, studies 

relying on these values cannot be reproduced under a strictly 

public  operational  information set. While market participants 

may indeed have access to proprietary or in -house forecasts 

prior to 12:00, the absence of an explicitly defined information 

cutoff limits operational reproducibility and comparability 

across studies.  This limitation is further compounded by the 

fact that forecasting performance may depend on access to 

proprietary data sources, which are rarely disclosed explicitly, 

ma king it difficult to assess and compare the effective 

information sets underlying competing models. 

More generally, the forecasting objective itself is 

sometimes insufficiently defined. Some studies appear to 

model prices predominantly as a function of fundamental 

drivers, implicitly excluding cross -market information such as 

earlier clearing  results (e.g., EXAA prices) without explicitly 

mentioning  this design choice. Yet such signals are available 

prior to EPEX day -ahead gate closure and are known to contain 

valuable information  [7], [10] . The absence of a clearly stated 

information cutoff and modeling objective , whether 

fundamental explanation, statistical accuracy under 

operational constraints, or structural interpretation , further 

complicates cross -study comparison. 

Forecasting competitions, such as the Global Energy 

Forecasting Competition  [2] , partially address this issue by 

imposing unified experimental conditions: a common dataset, 

predefined training and testing splits, standardized forecast 

horizons, and fixed evaluation metrics. These settings enhance 

transparency and ensure that model co mparisons are conducted 

under identical framework conditions. However, competition 

datasets are inherently static and limited to a predefined 

historical window. As a result, while they resolve 

inconsistencies in experimental design within a given 

challenge  period, they do not provide a continuously updated 

benchmark capable of assessing model robustness under 

evolving market regimes, changing renewable penetration 

levels, and shifting regulatory environments. 

Taken together, heterogeneous datasets, inconsistent 

information assumptions, partially implicit modeling 

objectives, and the static nature of existing competitions create 

a persistent comparability gap in energy forecasting research. 

While commercial forecasting tools operate under  operational 

constraints, they remain largely closed -source and non -

transparent, preventing independent verification of 

performance claims. Consequently, neither academic backtests 

nor proprietary solutions currently provide a co ntinuously 

updated, operationally consistent, and publicly comparable 

benchmark  (see Tab. 1) .

Dynamic forecasting competition platforms can reduce the 

comparability gap by moving evaluation from retrospective 

backtests to forward -looking assessment with standardized 

rules, automated scoring, and persistent leaderboards. Early 

examples include FlexU p Teamcast  [11] , which benchmarks 

short -term power market  price  forecasts, and TS -Arena  [12] ,

which  provide s leakage -free live evaluation of time -series 

foundation models  on future data.  In the broader machine 

learning and forecasting community, several recent 

benchmarks evaluate forecasting models across diverse 

domains, including ForecastBench  [13]  and fev -bench  [14] .Particularly for foundation models, limited transparency 

regarding training data and potential overlap with benchmark 

datasets can complicate the interpretation of reported 

performance.  While these initiatives improve standardization 

and task diversity, they are not specifically designed for 

operational energy forecasting: fev -bench relies on static 

historical datasets, and ForecastBench focuses on event -based 

prediction questions rather  than structured time -series 

forecasting under operational constraints.                         

> TABLE I.Stylized qualitative comparison of common energy forecast
> evaluation settings .
> Energy Forecasts Transparent Continuous Comparable Operational
> Research paper +---
> Commercial tools -+-+
> Static competition +-++
> Dynamic competition ++++

This paper introduces the Energy -Arena, a dynamic 

benchmarking platform for  energy time series  forecasting. The 

platform establishes a shared reference point for evaluating 

forecasting approaches as energy systems evolve over time. By 

enabling continuous comparison of models under common 

evaluation conditions, the Energy -Arena reduces the 

comparabi lity gap across studies and forecasting tools. For 

researchers, this facilitates more cumulative scientific progress 

by making methodological improvements easier to identify and 

validate. For practitioners and commercial providers, the 

platform provides a  transparent environment for benchmarking 

forecasting performance against state -of -the -art approaches 

under real -world market dynamics. In this way, the Energy -

Arena aims to create a continuously evolving benchmark that 

supports transparent and systematic progress in energy 

forecasting research. 

II.  ENERGY -ARENA 

The following section first presents the overall platform 

architecture, followed by a description of the participation 

workflow. Finally, it outlines how challenges are defined 

within the Energy -Arena and how continuous forecasting 

progress is tracked thro ugh leaderboards and forecast 

visualizations. 

A.  Energy -Arena  Platform  Architecture 

Fig.  2 provides a schematic overview of the platform 

architecture. The Energy -Arena is a modular,  Application 

Programming Interface (API) -driven benchmarking system that 

integrates standardized  challenge definitions, participant 

interaction, automated scoring, and continuously updated 

leaderboards. Forecasting challenges are defined through 

configuration files specifying  the challenge -specific framework 

conditions, such as the target variable and the temporal 

structure .

Participants interact with the platform through a web -based 

frontend that provides challenge descriptions, leaderboards, 

forecast  visualizations, and a personalized dashboard with API 

key management. Forecast submissions are sent 

programmatically to the backend through a dedicated 

submission API.  The backend validates incoming forecasts 

against the challenge configuration, enforces submission 

deadlines , e.g.,  corresponding to market gate -closure times, and 

stores participants, submissions, ground -truth values, and 

scoring results in a relational database.  In addition to participant 

submissions, the platform can host a set of reference  benchmark 

models to provide performance baselines. These may include 

simple statistical benchmarks (e.g., persistence or seasonal 

naïve forecasts) as well as more advanced machine learning 

models. 

Ground -truth data are retrieved from external data providers 

(e.g.,  ENTSO -E [15] ) and processed through a worker pipeline 

that periodically ingests new observations, evaluates pending 

submissions once realized values become available, and 

updates leaderboard aggregates over predefined evaluation 

windows. Leaderboards and forecast visu alizations are then 

displayed in the frontend interface. Email services support 

account registration and verification workflows. Through this 

architecture, the Energy -Arena enables automated forward 

evaluation of forecasting models under explicitly defined 

submission deadlines and standardized scoring rules, providing 

a transparent and continuously updated benchmark based on 

newly realized energy system data.          

> Figure 2.Schematic overview of the Energy -Arena platform architecture,
> illustrating the main system components and their interactions. (API =
> Application Programming Interface , ENTSO -E = European Network of
> Transmission System Operators for Electricity)

B.  Participation Workflow 

Fig. 3  illustrates the participation workflow of the Energy -

Arena. Participation consists of a one -time account setup 

followed by recurring automated forecast submissions aligned 

with the schedule of each forecasting challenge. Through the 

user dashboard, partici pants can generate API keys for 

programmatic submission and optionally provide metadata on 

their forecasting approach, such as a short method description, 

a code repository, or a link to a commercial service. They may 

also choose whether their submi tted forecast trajectories are 

publicly visualized or whether only aggregated performance 

metrics are displayed.    

> Figure 3. Visualization of the user participation workflow. (API = Application
> Programming Interface ).

C.  Challenge Design and Leaderboards 

Forecasting challenges in the Energy -Arena are defined 

through structured configuration files written in YAML, which 

specify all parameters required for data ingestion, submission 

validation, scoring, and leaderboard generation. This 

configuration -based ap proach allows new challenges to be 

added easily by extending the challenge repository with 

additional files, without requiring modifications to the 

platform’s core logic. Each challenge definition includes the 

target variable, geographic areas, reference t imezone, forecast 

horizon, submission deadlines and frequency, evaluation 

metrics, and leaderboard aggregation settings. Furthermore, 

the configuration specifies the data source for ground -truth 

observations (e.g., ENTSO -E Transparency Platform  [15] ), as 

well as constraints on forecast payloads such as timestamp 

structure, resolution, and value ranges. 

The temporal structure of a forecasting challenge is illustrated 

in Fig. 4 using the example of a day -ahead load forecasting 

task. Although day -ahead forecasting is a common operational 

setup in electricity markets, the Energy -Arena framework is 

not restri cted to this horizon and can support challenges with 

different forecast horizons and submission frequencies. In the 

example shown, forecasts must be submitted before a

predefined gate -closure time (e.g., 12:00 CET on the day 

preceding delivery) and must co ver the complete target period 

of the following calendar day in the specified reference 

timezone. Challenges are executed on a recurring schedule 

(e.g., daily cadence), generating a sequence of forecast targets 

over time. 

In addition to target definitions and submission constraints, 

each challenge implicitly defines an operational information 

set through the submission deadline. Participants are free to 

use any data that would be available at the time of forecast 

issuance,  including proprietary inputs such as weather 

forecasts or internally generated features. The platform does 

not enforce restrictions on exogenous variables, as such 

constraints would be difficult to verify in practice. Instead, 

participants may optionally p rovide metadata describing their 

input data sources (e.g., public vs. proprietary), enabling 

leaderboard segmentation and facilitating transparent 

comparison across different information regimes.       

> Figure 4.Exemplary visualization of the temporal relationship between
> forecast submission deadline , forecast period , and the frequency of forecasting
> events within the day -ahead load forecasting challenge.

Once the  corresponding ground -truth values become 

available, submitted forecasts are automatically evaluated 

using predefined performance metrics such as Mean Absolute 

Error (MAE) and Root Mean Square Error (RMSE).  These 

metrics are part of a standardized set provided by the platform 

and can be selected within the challenge configuration.  In 

addition to point forecasts, the platform supports probabilistic 

submissions, including quantile and ensemble forecasts, which 

are evaluated using proper scoring rules such as the 

Continuous Ranked Probability Score (CRPS) and the 

Weighted Interval Score (WIS). Submissions may include 

point predictions as well as distributional information (e.g., 

sets of quantiles and/or ensemble members), allowing multiple 

forecast representatio ns to be evaluated within a unified 

framework.  The resulting scores are aggregated over rolling 

evaluation windows (e.g., 1, 7, 30, 90, and 365 days) and 

displayed on challenge leaderboards, enabling continuous 

comparison of  forecasting approaches under co nsistent 

operational conditions. Fig. 5 illustrates an exemplary 

leaderboard for the day -ahead load forecasting challenge 

described above. Platform users can filter leaderboards  by 

challenge, geographic area, and evaluation window, and sort 

results according to their preferred performance metric. Figure  5. Exemplary v isualization of the leaderboard for the day -ahead load   

> forecasting challenge. Metrics are computed over the last N periods (here, N
> = 7) for which ground truth is available. (MAE = Mean Absolute Error, RMSE
> =Root Mean Square Error ).

By selecting the information button in the final column, 

users can access additional details about the forecasting 

approach used by the respective participant, provided that such 

information has been supplied for the corresponding 

challenge –area combinatio n via the dashboard. Furthermore, 

by selecting a participant entry, users can inspect the submitted 

forecast time series in an interactive visualization and compare 

forecasts across participants as well as against the realized 

ground truth. The visualizati on of forecast trajectories is only 

available if participants choose to make their forecasts publicly 

visible through the dashboard settings. 

III.  CONCLUSION  AND  OUTLOOK 

This paper introduced the Energy -Arena, a dynamic 

benchmarking platform designed to enable continuous and 

operationally consistent evaluation of energy forecasting 

models. The platform addresses a key limitation of existing 

research benchmarks and forecast ing competitions, namely 

their static nature and limited reproducibility with respect to 

real -world information availability. By combining 

standardized challenge definitions, automated forward 

evaluation, and continuously updated leaderboards, the 

Energy -Arena provides a transparent reference point for 

comparing forecasting approaches under evolving  energy 

system  conditions. 

Future development of the platform will focus on 

expanding the set of forecasting challenges and evaluation 

settings. While the current implementation primarily targets 

deterministic day -ahead forecasting tasks, future challenges 

may  include probabilistic forecasts and scenario -based 

predictions for  various  energy time series . In addition, new 

geographic regions and temporal resolutions can be integrated 

through the configuration -based challenge design, allowing the 

platform to adapt to emerging research an d industry needs.  As 

an optional community -building mechanism, the platform 

could host time -limited themed competitions (e.g., seasonal or 

event -focused challenges) with standardized rules and optional 

prizes, while keeping the underlying challenges and 

leaderboards as a pe rsistent, continuously updated benchmark. 

Beyond methodological benchmarking, the Energy -Arena 

aims to foster collaboration between academia and industry. 

Researchers can use the platform to evaluate new forecasting 

methods under realistic operational constraints, while 

commercial providers can be nchmark proprietary models 

against publicly available approaches. If participants choose to 

make their forecasts publicly visible, the submitted predictions 

can form a continuously growing archive of historical 

forecasts. Such an archive would enable the c ommunity to 

reconstruct the forecasting landscape at specific points in time 

and perform backtesting studies based on forecasts that were 

actually issued before the realization of the corresponding 

outcomes. The platform can also support educational 

applic ations, for example , through university forecasting 

challenges , such as  [16] , in which students develop and deploy 

forecasting models on the platform. In this way, the Energy -

Arena aims to contribute to a more transparent, collaborative, 

and continuously evolving ecosystem for energy forecasting 

research and practice. 

IV.  AUTHOR  CONTRIBUTIONS 

M. Kleinebrahm conceived and designed the Energy -Arena 

platform, developed the benchmarking framework, 

implemented the system, and wrote the manuscript. F. Ziel, J. 

Berrisch, and N. Koster contributed to the conceptualization of 

the platform. All other aut hors contributed to reviewing and 

editing the manuscript. 

REFERENCES                                             

> [1] J. Lago, G. Marcjasz, B. De Schutter, and R. Weron, “Forecasting day -
> ahead electricity prices: A review of state -of -the -art algorithms, best
> practices and an open -access benchmark,” Applied Energy , vol. 293, p.
> 116983, Jul. 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.116983.
> [2] T. Hong, P. Pinson, S. Fan, H. Zareipour, A. Troccoli, and R. J.
> Hyndman, “Probabilistic energy forecasting: Global Energy Forecasting
> Competition 2014 and beyond,” International Journal of Forecasting ,
> vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 896 –913, Jul. 2016, doi:
> 10.1016/j.ijforecast.2016.02.001.
> [3] T. Hong, P. Pinson, Y. Wang, R. Weron, D. Yang, and H. Zareipour,
> “Energy Forecasting: A Review and Outlook,” IEEE Open J. Power
> Energy , vol. 7, pp. 376 –388, 2020, doi: 10.1109/OAJPE.2020.3029979.
> [4] S. Loizidis, A. Kyprianou, and G. E. Georghiou, “Electricity market
> price forecasting using ELM and Bootstrap analysis: A case study of the
> German and Finnish Day -Ahead markets,” Applied Energy , vol. 363, p.
> 123058, Jun. 2024, doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2024.123058.
> [5] H. Hewamalage, K. Ackermann, and C. Bergmeir, “Forecast evaluation
> for data scientists: common pitfalls and best practices,” Data Min Knowl
> Disc , vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 788 –832, Mar. 2023, doi: 10.1007/s10618 -022 -
> 00894 -5.
> [6] G. Marcjasz, M. Narajewski, R. Weron, and F. Ziel, “Distributional
> neural networks for electricity price forecasting,” Energy Economics ,
> vol. 125, p. 106843, Sep. 2023, doi: 10.1016/j.eneco.2023.106843.
> [7] M. M. Mascarenhas, J. De Blauwe, M. Amelin, and H. Kazmi,
> “Leveraging asynchronous cross -border market data for improved day -
> ahead electricity price forecasting in European markets,” Applied
> Energy ,vol. 404, p. 127077, Feb. 2026, doi:
> 10.1016/j.apenergy.2025.127077.
> [8] H. Hilger, D. Witthaut, M. Dahmen, L. Rydin Gorjão, J. Trebbien, and
> E. Cramer, “Multivariate scenario generation of day -ahead electricity
> prices using normalizing flows,” Applied Energy , vol. 367, p. 123241,
> Aug. 2024, doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2024.123241.

[9]  Transparency Platform, “Generation Forecasts for Wind and Solar 

[14.1.D].” [Online]. Available: 

https://transparencyplatform.zendesk.com/hc/en -

us/articles/16648445340180 -Generation -Forecasts -for -Wind -and -

Solar -14 -1-D

[10]  F. Ziel, R. Steinert, and S. Husmann, “Forecasting day ahead electricity 

spot prices: The impact of the EXAA to other European electricity 

markets,”  Energy Economics , vol. 51, pp. 430 –444, Sep. 2015, doi: 

10.1016/j.eneco.2015.08.005. 

[11]  “FlexUp.” [Online]. Available: https://www.flexup.pro 

[12]  M. Meyer, S. Kaltenpoth, H. Albers, K. Zalipski, and O. Müller, “TS -

Arena  -- A Live Forecast Pre -Registration Platform,” 2025,  arXiv . doi: 

10.48550/ARXIV.2512.20761. 

[13]  E. Karger  et al. , “ForecastBench: A Dynamic Benchmark of AI 

Forecasting Capabilities,” Feb. 28, 2025,  arXiv : arXiv:2409.19839. doi: 

10.48550/arXiv.2409.19839. 

[14]  O. Shchur  et al. , “fev -bench: A Realistic Benchmark for Time Series 

Forecasting,” Feb. 03, 2026,  arXiv : arXiv:2509.26468. doi: 

10.48550/arXiv.2509.26468. 

[15]  ENTSO -E, “Transparency Platform.” [Online]. Available: 

https://transparency.entsoe.eu/ 

[16]  J. Bracher, N. Koster, F. Krüger, and S. Lerch, “Learning to Forecast: 

The Probabilistic Time Series Forecasting Challenge,”  The American 

Statistician , vol. 78, no. 1, pp. 115 –127, Jan. 2024, doi: 

10.1080/00031305.2023.2199800.