Title: пҖ 

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.28450v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 02:08:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 1

Abstract вҖ”With the development of PMUs in power system s, the 

response -based real -time emergency control becomes a promising 

way to prevent power outages when power system s are subjected 

to large disturbance s. The first step in the emergency control is to 

start up accurate ly and fast when needed. To this end, t his paper 

proposes a well -qualified start -up scheme for the power system 

real -time emergency control . Three key technologies are proposed 

to ensure the effectiveness of the scheme. They are an instability 

index, a Critic al Machines (CMs) identification algorithm and a 

two -layer Single Machine Infinite Bus (SMIB) equivalence 

framework. The concave -convex area based instability index 

shows good accuracy and high reliability , which is used to identify 

the transient instability of the system . The CMs identification 

algorithm can track the changes of CMs and form the proper 

SMIB system at each moment. The new two -layer SMIB 

equivalence framework, compared with conventional ones, can 

significantly reduce the communicati on burden and im prove the 

computation efficiency. The simulations in two test power system s

show that the scheme can identify the transient instability 

accurately and fast to restore the system to stability after the 

emergency control. Besides, the proposed method is robust to 

measurement errors , which enhances its practicality .

Index Terms вҖ”Con cave -con vex area, CMs identification , two -

layer SMIB equivalence, transient stability , response -based 

emergency control 

I. INTRODUCTION 

ORDEN power systems are operating near their designed 

stability limits due to economic reasons and operational 

constraints [1] . When subjected to large disturbance s, these 

power system s suf fer a high risk of los s of synchronism and 

even power outage . In this situation , the real -time emergency 

control becomes vital to the power system . The primary step of 

such control is to identify the transient instability and start the 

control . The emergency control should only be activated if the 

system is indeed driving to instability . Otherwise, the wrongly 

initiated emergency controls may deteriorate the transient 

stability of the system . In addition , the emergency control 

should be started fast in order to guarantee the effect iveness of 

control measures . Thus, a start -up scheme that f eatures accurate 

and fast transient instability detection is necessarily required for 

the emergency control .

Currently, the start -up scheme s of the emergency control are 

either event -based or response -based. The even t-based 

emergency control methods first evaluate the transient stability 

of a series of pre -imagine d contingencies by Transient Stability 

Assessment (TSA) technique s, e.g. , the Extend ed Equal Area 

Criterion ( EEAC ) [2] , S ingle Machine Equivalent (SIME) [3] ,

stability region theory [4] and relative transie nt energy function 

[5] . Then they design proper control actions for unstable cases 

and finally derive a decision table [6, 7] . Once a pre -imag in ed 

contingency occur s, the emergency control will be initiated 

immediately, and the corresponding control action s will be 

taken [8] . Despite the fast response speed, the se event -based 

emergen cy control schemes have restricted accuracy due to 

their dependence on offline simulations when they are applied 

in the real -time emergency control . Besides, th ese method s can 

only handle the pre -imagined contingencies , but fail to deal 

with the unexpected ones .

The response -based real -time emergency control, by contrast, 

aims at assessing whether the contingency that has already 

occurred is driving the system to instability . With the 

development of PMU s in the power s ystem, the se response -

based methods are attracting more and more attention . These 

methods can be classified into three categories:1) predicted 

response base methods , 2) machine learning based methods and 

3) instability characteristic based methods .

The predicted response based start -up schemes predict the 

future transient response of the power system by model -free 

methods such as the curve fitting technique [9] and then detect 

the instability in real time. Despite being simple and requiring 

little information, these schemes have unstable accuracy 

because the prediction accuracy is sensitive to the number of 

data points , the sampling frequency and the order of pre diction 

model [10, 11] . The inaccurate prediction will lead to the 

malfunction of the real -time emergency control. 

Although the machine learning methods are heuristic, they 

are widely used in emergency control because of their fast 

response speed . In this kind of methods, a series of classifiers 

are trained offline through machine learning technique s such as 

decision tree [12, 13] , arti ficial neural network [1, 14 -16] and 

support vector machine method s [17 -20] . Then the classifiers 

are applied in real time to identify the transient instability. The 

accuracy of these methods is promising when classifiers are 

sufficient ly trained . However, offline training is a time -

consuming work because it needs to adapt to the various system 

operati ng condition s and numerous possible disturbances .

Moreover, the classifiers become unreliable if the practical 

system shows different dynamic s from the offline training data .

# An Accurate and Fast Start -up Scheme for 

# Power System Real -time Emergency Control 

Songhao Yang , student member , IEEE , Zhiguo Hao, Member, IEEE , Baohui Zhang , Fellow , IEEE ,

Masahide Hojo , Member, IEEE 

# M

Songhao Yang , Zhiguo Hao and Baohui Zhang are with School of 

Electrical Engineering, XiвҖҷan Jiaotong University, XiвҖҷan, China. 

(email : songhaoyang@stu.xjtu.edu.cn; zhghao@mail.xjtu.edu.cn ;

bhzhang@mail.xjtu.edu.cn). 

Masahide Hojo are with Department of Electrical and Electronic 

Engineering, Tokushima University, Tokushima, Japan 

(email : hojo@ee.tokushima -u.ac.jp) > REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 2

For t he instability characteristic based methods , specific 

instab ility criteria de duce d from the mathematical or physical 

analysis are involved . They seem to be more reliable than those 

heuristic methods because of their physical theoretical 

foundation . The instability criteria are mostly calculated based 

on the measured physical variables such as the state variables 

of the buses and generators. In [21] , the Lyapunov Exponent s

(LEs ) of generator pairs were applied to identify the transient 

stability in real time . However, it takes seconds to correctly 

identify the instability, which is too late for the real -time 

emergency control. A post -disturbance bus voltage magnitude -

based stability prediction method was proposed in [22] .

Although t he method is fast and straightforward , it need s to 

determine the stability boundary in advance by offline 

simulation , where the parameter and model uncertainties may 

decrease the accuracy . The emergency SIME method s in [3] 

and [23] get rid of the dependence on models by determining 

the parameters of the equivalent Singe Machine Infinite Bus 

(SMIB) system with PMU data . However, the accuracy of the 

parameter s identification cannot be guaranteed in the practical 

power system . The graphic al characteristic of the phase 

trajectory was applied to the transient instability detection of 

the SMIB system in [24] , which was described as: вҖҷ a stable 

trajectory is always concave with respect to the post -fault Stable 

Equilibrium Point (SEP) while an unstabl e trajectory is convex 

with respect to the post -fault SEP immediately or a short time 

after the fault -clearing time вҖҷ. The instability feature was 

mathematically demonstrated in [25] and was further extended 

to the multi -machine power system by a SMIB equivalence in 

[26] .

The instability characteristic of the phase trajec tory is simple 

and easy to identify , which is promising in the real -time TSA .

However, several problems need to be addressed before the 

characteristic is used to start real -time emergency control. 

Firstly , when using the discrete PMU data for the instability 

index calculation , the existing methods in [25, 26] ha ve the 

se vere problem of noise due to multiple differential operations, 

which may start the emerge ncy control incorrectly . Sec ondly ,

the SMIB equivalence is required to evaluate the transient 

stability of the multi -machine power system. However, the 

time -changing critical machines ( CMs) increase the difficulty 

of obtaining an accurate SMIB system . Thirdly , in the 

conventional SMIB equivalence methods , all generator data 

need s to be directly upload ed to the global control center .

However, this way of processing data is not allowed in a

practical power system due to data privacy and limitations of 

existing hierarchical control framework . Moreover , when 

applied to a large -scale power system, the conventional 

equivalence methods ha ve the problems of heavy 

communication burden and long computation time [27, 28] .

The transmission of massive data under insufficient bandwidth 

will cause communication delay and data drop out , which may 

reduce the accuracy of the start -up scheme. And the long 

processing time of massive data in the global control center will 

delay the start -up of the emergency control. 

In this paper, an accurate and fast start -up scheme is proposed 

for power system real -time emergency control. The start -up 

scheme is continuously executed with the updated measurement 

data from PMUs. If the power system is identified as unstable, 

the emergency control will be initiated immediately to prevent 

the system from collapse. The accuracy of the scheme is 

guaranteed by a reliable instability index a nd a real -time CMs 

identification algorithm. The instability index features l ess 

information required, smaller computation amount and high er 

noise tolerance. The CMs identification algorithm can track the 

change s of CMs during the transient process to form the correct 

SIMB system at each moment . The real -time operation of the 

start -up scheme benefits from a novel two -layer SMIB 

equivalence framework which enables to reduce the 

communication burden and improve the computation efficiency 

of massive data . The rest of paper is organized as follows: 

Section II introduces the contributions of the work . Section III 

presents the outline of the start -up scheme for real -time 

emergency control. Simulations in section IV verify the 

effectiveness of the proposed sta rt -up scheme and section V 

gives the conclusion. 

II. CONTRIBUTIONS 

To start the real -time emergency control accurately and fast ,

we prop ose a reliable instability index, a fast two -layer SMIB 

equivalence framework and a real -time critical machines 

identification algorithm in this paper .

A. The concave -convex area -based instability index 

For a SMIB power system, the convex -concavity of the phase 

trajectory is proved to be related to the systemвҖҷs transient 

stability [24 -26] . To apply th is relationship to real -time 

emergency control of the power system, we develop a novel 

instability index based on the concept of the concave -convex 

area on the phase plane .

Mathematically, the curve ( ) y f x= is convex if it satisfies ( ) 0f xпӮўпӮў пҖҫ

. For the phase trajectories on the phase plane that is 

composed of the generatorвҖҷs power angle пҒӨ and angular speed 

deviation пҒ·пҒ„ , the concave -convexity index of the phase 

trajectory can be defined as 22  

> dld
> пҒ·пҒӨпҒ„=

(1).

The continuous curve composed by t he phase point s that 

satisfy l=0 is called infle ct ion curve. It naturally div ides the 

phase plane into two areas: the concave area ( 0) l  

> пҒ·вҖў пҒ„ пҖј

and the 

convex area 0) l  

> пҒ·вҖў пҒ„ пҖҫпјҲ

. The location of the concave -convex 

area s on the phase plane is given in  Fig. 1 which also shows the 

relationship between phase trajectories and the concave -convex 

area s. In  Fig. 1, t he trajectories of stable cases in which the fault 

duration is short er than the Critical Clearance Time (CCT) 

(tc1 <tc2 <CCT ) always stay in the concave area whereas the 

trajectories of unstable cases in which the fault is cleared later 

than the CCT ( CCT <tc3 <tc4 ) enter the convex area inevitably. 

As a вҖҳblack holeвҖҷ on the phase plane, the convex area is the no -

return -area for phase trajectories , which indicates the tra nsient 

instability of the power system . Thus, transient in stability of the 

system can be identifi ed by dete cting whether the phase 

trajectory enters the convex area. > REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 3concave area         

> -0.02
> 0.00
> 0.02 te
> пҖ°
> tc4 tc3 tc2
> пҒӨu
> Stable trajectory Unstable trajectory
> пҒӨs
> пҒ°пҒ°пҖҜпҖІ
> Speed Deviation  пҒ„пҒ· (p.u.)
> Angle пҒӨ(rad)
> convex area
> пҒӨos
> Inflexion curve
> tc1
> Fig. 1Phase trajectories and the concave -convex area sonthe phase plane

According to the definition of the convex area, the phase 

trajectories in convex area satisfy (2).220

10 0 0 0, 

d dk d dk l d d dt dt 

пҒ·пҒӨпҒ·пҒ·пҒӨпҒӨпҒ·пҒ„вҖў пҒ„ пҖҫ пғһ вҖў пҒ„ пҖҫ пғһ вҖў вҖў пҖҫ пғһ пҖҫ

(2)

where k is the slope of phase trajectory dk d

пҒ· пҒӨпҒ„= and 0 02 f

пҒ· пҒ°=

.0f is the system frequency, 50Hz or 60Hz. 

The rotor motion equations of the SMIB system in (3) is used 

to avoid the multi -order derivat ion operations in (2).0 0 0; m eM P P D P D

пҒӨ пҒ· пҒ· пҒ·пҒ· пҒ·пҒ· пҒ· 

> вҖўвҖў

= пҒ„ пҒ„ = вҲ’ вҲ’ пҒ„ = пҒ„ вҲ’ пҒ„ пјҢ

(3)

where e mP PпјҢ and PпҒ„ are separately generatorвҖҷs electrical power, 

mechanical power , and power difference . Parameters D is the 

damping factor , and M is inertia constant. 

Th us, the slope k can be written in the form of (4).00

P Dd dt k dt d M

пҒ· пҒ·пҒ· пҒӨпҒ· пҒ·пҒ„ вҲ’ пҒ„пҒ„= вҖў = пҒ„

(4)

Since that the measurement data from PMUs is discrete, (5)

gives a differential form of the new instability criterion in (2).0

( ) ( ) 1 ( ) ( )( ) 0( ) ( )

k t k t t P t P t tt tM t t t

пҒ· пҒ· пҒ·вҲ’ вҲ’ пҒ„ пҒ„ пҒ„ вҲ’ пҒ„ = вҲ’ пҖҫпҒ„ пҒ„ пҒ„ пҒ„ вҲ’ пҒ„ 

(5)

A simpler form is deduced in (6) by omitting the constant 

terms in (5).( ) ( )( ) 0( ) ( )

P t P t tc t t t t

пҒ· пҒ·пҒ„ пҒ„ вҲ’ пҒ„ = вҲ’ пҖҫпҒ„ пҒ„ вҲ’ пҒ„ 

(6)

It can be inferred from (6) that the calculation of the new 

instability index only require the data of the current moment t

and last moment t tвҲ’ пҒ„  , and all required generator information, PпҒ„

and пҒ·пҒ„ , can be obtained from PMUs .

Also , i t should be noted in  Fig. 1 that the instability detection 

time ,et , namely the moment phase trajectory enters the convex 

area, is earlier than the moment that the angle exceeds the angle 

of Unsta ble Equilibrium Point(UEP), u

пҒӨ . According to [29] , if 

no control measures are taken , the system will inevitably lose 

the stability after the phase angle exceeds u

пҒӨ . In other words, 

the proposed instability criterion can predict transient instability 

before the system become s truly unstable . The early 

identification of instability leav es enough time to initiate and 

implement the emergency con trol. 

B. The two -layer SMIB equivalence framework 

The SMIB equivalence is widely used in TSA to identify the 

transient stability of the multi -machine power system [3] . It 

assumes that the loss of synchronism originates from the 

separation of generators into two groups: the group C of critical 

machines (CMs) and the other group N of non -critical machines 

(NMs). The transient stability of the original multi -machine 

power system is presented by the relative motion of these two 

groups of generators. Th erefore, the equivalent SMIB system 

describing the relative motion in (7) is necessary for the TSA. , ,, ,                                                  

> jjjjiiiijNjNiCiCrrijijiCjNiCjNijjiijiCjNjNiCiCjNrrijijiCjNiCjN

M MM MM M M MM M M P M PM PM M M M

пҒӨпҒ·пҒӨпҒ·пҒӨпҒ·пғҺ пғҺпғҺ пғҺпғҺ пғҺ пғҺ пғҺпғҺ пғҺ пғҺ пғҺ пғҺ пғҺпғҺ пғҺ пғҺ пғҺ

пҒ„пҒ„= вҲ’ пҒ„ = вҲ’пҒ„ вҲ’ пҒ„= пҒ„ =+ +

# пғҘ пғҘпғҘ пғҘпғҘ пғҘ пғҘ пғҘпғҘ пғҘ пғҘ пғҘ пғҘ пғҘпғҘ пғҘ пғҘ пғҘ

(7)

where , , M

пҒӨ пҒ·пҒ„ and PпҒ„ are the power angle, angular speed 

deviation, the inertia constant and the power difference ,

respectively . The variables attached with the subscript i

represent the state variables of the i-th generator and those 

attached with subscript r represent the state variables of the 

equivalent SMIB system. 

To address the problems of heavy communication burden 

and long computation time in the conventional SMIB 

equivalence method , we propose a novel two -layer SMIB 

equivalence framework in this paper .

We assume that the practical power grid consists of several 

area grids. There is one area control center for each area grid 

and one global control center for the entire power grid. Note 

that the concept of area grid is different from th at of generator 

group. Generator location decides its belonging to the area grid 

whereas the generator dynamic decides its belonging to the 

generator group (CMs or NMs) . The relationships between 

generators, area grid s, and generator groups are shown in  Fig. 

2. Generators in same area grid may belong to same or different 

generator groups during the transient process. For example, a ll 

generators of area 1 (area 3) belong to the same generator group 

C (group N), whereas generators of area 2 belong to different 

generator groups. C Group N Group        

> Area 1
> Area 2 Area 3 Generator Area COI Generator Global COI Generator 1st layer Equivalence 2nd layer Equivalence
> Fig. 2The chart of the two -layer SMIB equivalence framework

Based on the assumed two -layer control structure, the two -

layer SMIB equivalence framework is presented as :

a) 1st layer equivalence: In each area grid, g enerators that 

belong to same generator group are equivalent to one Center of 

Inertia (COI) generator by (8)., ,, ,, ,

,,                         

> iiiiip i Gip i GppGGiiip i Gip i GppGiGiip i Gip i G

M MM MM M P P

пҒӨпҒ·пҒӨпҒ·пғҺ пғҺ пғҺ пғҺпғҺ пғҺ пғҺ пғҺпғҺ пғҺ пғҺ пғҺ

пҒ„= пҒ„ == пҒ„ = пҒ„

# пғҘ пғҘпғҘ пғҘпғҘ пғҘ

(8)> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 4

where , ,p p pG G GM

пҒӨ пҒ·пҒ„ and pGPпҒ„ are separately the power angle, 

angular speed deviation, the inertia constant and the power 

difference of the COI generator in area p and group G (G=C or 

N). As  Fig. 2 shows , generators that belong to the same group, 

such as th ose in area 1 or 3, are equivalent to one COI generator. 

And generators that belong to different group s, such as th ose in 

area 2, ar e equivalent to two COI generators. 

b) 2nd layer equivalence: The COI generators that belong to the 

same generator group (C or N) are equivalent to one global COI 

generator . T he two global COI generators compose the final 

equivalent SMIB system by (9)., ,,                                                  

> ppppppppCCNNCCNNppppppppCNCNppppppppppCNNCCNppppppppppCNCNpppp

M M M MM M M MM M M P M PM PM M M M

пҒӨпҒӨпҒ·пҒ·пҒӨпҒ·пҒ„ пҒ„= вҲ’ пҒ„ = вҲ’пҒ„ вҲ’ пҒ„= пҒ„ =+ +

# пғҘ пғҘ пғҘ пғҘпғҘ пғҘ пғҘ пғҘпғҘ пғҘ пғҘ пғҘ пғҘ пғҘпғҘ пғҘ пғҘ пғҘ

(9)

It can be mathematically proved that the final equivalent 

system obtained by the two -layer SMIB equivalence method in 

(8) and (9) is identical to the one obtained by the direct SMIB 

equivalence method in (7). In other words, the new SMIB 

equivalence method does not affect the accuracy of transient 

instability detection . Besides, the two -layer SMIB equivalence 

method features less communication burden and high er 

computation efficiency because the area control centers share 

most of the computation . Further analysis and verification are 

given in section IV subsection C. 

C. The real -time CMs identification algorithm 

In the two -layer SMIB equivalence framework, the CMs 

identification is required in both the area control center s and the 

global control center. Accurate CMs identification is the 

guarantee of the correct SMIB equivalence . When applied to 

the real -time emergency control, the CMs identification 

encounters stricter requirements . First, the CMs identification 

algorithm should be fast and straightforwa rd to reduce the 

computation time. Besides, the identification results should be 

continuously updated over time to track the changes of CMs. 

To meet these requirements , we propose a real -time CMs 

identification algorithm based on the Largest Angle Gap (LAG). 

step:1 Initialize all generators at t:( ) ( ) (0) i i it t

пҒӨ пҒӨ пҒӨпӮў = вҲ’ ;

step:2 Sort generators in increasing order by ( ) i t

пҒӨ пӮў  ;

step:3 Compute the angle gap between nearby generators in 

the sequence obtained in step 2;

step:4 Choose the LAG as the boundary of diffe rent generator 

groups. Generators above the boundary belong to the C-group ,

and others belong to the N-group. 

Note that we pay more attention to the post -disturbance 

behavior of generators . T hus we adopt the initialization in step 

1 to avoid the dependence on the initial state , just like [30] .

The primary feature of the proposed algorithm is that the 

result s of CMs identification are continuously updated over 

time. Th e feature allows the algorithm to track the change s of 

CMs and obtain an accurate equivalent SMIB system at each 

moment . Moreover, the real -time operation of CMs 

identification also help s to make more effective emergency 

control strateg ies . Accurate CMs iden tification means correct 

control objects, which are the guarantee of effective emergency 

control. 

III. THE START -UP SCHEME FOR REAL -TIME EMERGENCY 

CONTROL 

In this paper, a start -up scheme for real -time emergency 

control is proposed based on the two -layer control structure in 

a power system . The area control centers collect the 

measurement data from PMUs and transmit the data to the 

global control center. The global control center is responsible 

for the transient instability detection and the emergency cont rol 

start -up.  Fig. 3 (a) and (b) show the schematic diagram in the 

area control center s and the global control center , respectively .

Started after the disturbance occurrence, the scheme is executed 

at each moment with continuously updated measurement data 

from PMUs. The outline of the start -up scheme is given as 

follows. Measurement data collection    

> Is (11) satisfied? Equivalent to one COI generator by (8)
> Divide generators of area pinto two groups with LAG method
> Equivalent to two COI generators by (8) Global Control Center
> Area control center p
> Yes No

G G G G 

> 1st Layer equivalence
> Angle Initialization t=t+ О”t

(a) CMs identification with LAG method SMIB equivalence by (9) Compute instability index c(t) by (6) System unstable? Start the Emergency control t=t+ О”tArea Control Center 1 Area Control Center p   

> Area Control Center m
> Global control center
> Collect area COI generators data
> 2nd Layer equivalence Instability detecion No Yes

(b) 

Fig. 3 The s chematic diagram in (a) the area control center p and (b) the global 

control center 

A. Measurement data collection in the area control center s

The proposed scheme requires generatorsвҖҷ state information 

includ ing the angle i

пҒӨ , angular speed deviation i

пҒ·пҒ„ and power 

difference iPпҒ„ at each moment. The PMUs equipped on each 

generator can provide all the required information. The power > REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 5

angle i

пҒӨ can be obtained directly, and others can be derived 

indirectly by (10 ).00

( ) ( )=2 , ( ) ( ) ( ) m e

f t ft P t P t P t f

пҒ· пҒ° вҲ’пҒ„ пҒ„ = вҲ’

(10 )

In (10 ), f is the frequency of the generator bus , and f0 is the 

system nominal frequency. mP is the mechanical power which 

can be measured by the sensor s on the rotor s.eP is the electrical 

power which is provided by P MUs. If it is difficult to measure eP

directly, a backup scheme is given as cos eP UI 

пҒұ= where ,U I 

and пҒұ are the voltage, current and the angle between them. 

The measurement data is updated every recording cycle which 

is selectable from 20ms to 100ms according to [31] . Then the 

data will be transmitted t o the area control center s for the 1 st 

layer equivalence. 

B. 1st layer equivalence in the area control center s

After receiving the measurement data, the area control 

center s first initialize s the angles to reduce the influence of the 

initial state and then determine s whether the generators of this 

area belong to the same generator group by (11 ).max, min, ( ) ( ) ,p p Set t t

пҒӨпҒӨпҒӨвҲ’ пҖј

(11 )

where max, ( ) p t

пҒӨ and min, ( ) p t

пҒӨ are separately the maximum angle 

and minimum angle of all generators in th e area p at moment t.set 

пҒӨ

is the power angle threshold value which is determined by 

the system scale . The value is suggested in the range of 5В° -10 В°.

If (11 ) is satisfied at moment t, all generators of area p are 

coherent and surely belong to the same generator group [32] .

The n these generators are equivalent to one area COI generator 

by (8). Otherwise, the generators in the area p may belong to 

two different groups, just like the generators in area 2 in  Fig. 2.

In such situations, the generators of area p are divided into two 

groups by the real -time CMs identification algorithm . Then 

these two generator groups are equivalent to two area COI 

generat ors by (8).

By the 1 st layer equivalence in the area control center s,

generators of each area grid are equivalent to one or two area 

COI generators. Afterward , the data of area COI generators is 

transmitted to the global control center for the transient 

instability identification. 

C. 2nd layer equivalence in the global control center 

In the global control center , all area COI generators are 

treated as independent generator s, and they are divided into two 

groups in real time by the LAG based CMs identification 

algorithm . Then t he final equivalent SMIB system at moment t

is obtained by (9).

D. Transient instability detection in the global control center 

The instability index , c(t), is computed by (6) based on the 

phase trajectory of the equivalent SMIB system . If c(t)<0, the 

scheme will return to the area control center s and continue to 

detect the transient instability with updated measurement data 

of the next moment. If c(t)>0, the system is identifi ed as 

unstable , and the emergency control will be started immediately .

IV. SIMULATIONS 

The start -up scheme for real -time emerg ency control is tested 

in the 39 -bus 10 -machine power system [33] and the 145 -bus 

50 -machine power system [34] . In the 39 -bus 10 -machine 

system, all generators use the 4th order generator model s, and 

each of them is equipped with the type ac -4 ex citer [35] and the 

Power System Stabilizer (PSS) . In the 145 -bus 50 -machine 

system, 6 generators use the 4th order generator model s, and the 

rest 44 generator s use the classical generator model s. Type ac -

4 e xciter is also equipped on each generator. The transient 

simulations are calculated on the PSASP -a software platform 

for power system simulation . The steady power flow of the 

power system is first calculated before the transient simulation 

starts . The n the required data , which includ es the power angle, 

angular speed and power difference of each generator , is 

simulated in PSASP and input ted as the PMU measurement 

data into the scheme . The recording rate of the PMU s adopts 

50Hz and set 

пҒӨ in (11 ) is set as 10 В°.

A. 39 bus 10 -machine power system G1       

> 30 39 1225 37 29 17 26 9338 16 5418 27 28 36 24 35 22 21 20 34 23 19 33 10 11 13 14 15 831 12 632 7
> G10 G2 G8 G3 G4 G5 G6 G7 G9
> Area 1 Area 2 Area 3 Area 4
> Fig. 439 -bus 10 -machine power system

As  Fig. 4 shows , the 39 -bus power system consists of 4 areas 

and 10 generators. Two critical cases are simulated t o verify the 

accuracy of the proposed scheme. 

Case 1: T hree -phase short -circuit ground fault occur s on the 

line 26 -29 at t=0s , then the fault line is eliminated at t=0.117s .

Case 2: Same fault occurs on the same line, but the fault line 

is eliminated at t=0.118s . The slight difference in fault duration 

leads to the opposite transient stability results. 

The transient stability of the two cases is identified in real 

time by the proposed scheme following steps in  Fig. 3. After 

the 1st layer equivalence in the area control center s, the 

generators of each area grid are equivalent to one or two COI 

generators , as shown in  Fig. 5. It is noted that the angle curves 

of some area COI generators are segmented because the number 

of COI generators determined by (11 ) is not constant during the 

whole transient process . For example, for the generators in area 

4 in case 1 , they are equivalent to one COI generator when the 

power angles are close , but generators are equivalent to two 

COI generators at moments that (11 ) is not satisfied. The time -

updated 1st layer equivalence ensures that generators belong ing 

to different groups can be separated correctly. It is the guarantee 

of the accurate CMs identification in the 2 nd layer equivalence. 

Table 1 shows the results of the real -time CMs identification 

in the 2 nd layer equivalence . The COI Gen. No. is short for the > REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 6

COI generator number. No. 4(5) represents the one (or two) area 

COI generator (s) in area 4 in case 1 at different moments. Each 

COI generator is treated as an independent generator in the 

global control center and then grouped in real time by the CMs 

ident ification algorithm . Table 1 sho ws that CMs change twice 

and finally form three different instability modes in case 1 

whereas the instability mode rem ains unchanged in case 2. 

TABLE 1 RESULTS OF THE REAL -TIME CM S IDENTIFICATION IN CASES 1 AND 2

Time  CMs 

(COI Gen. No.) 

NMs 

(COI Gen. No.)  Mode 

Case 1 

0.12s -1.42 s {3},  {1,2,4(5 )} 1

1.44s -1.48s  {1,3,4}  {2}  2

1.50s -2s  {1 2 4 (5) },  {3}  3

Case 2  0.12s -2s {3}  {1,2,4}  1All generators of this area Area COI generators 

Fig. 5 1st layer equivalence in area control centers in case 1 -1 0 1 2 3

-0.02 

-0.01 

0.00 

0.01 

0.02 

0.03 Phase Trajectory of case 1 via direct SMIB equivalence Phase Trajectory of case 1 via two-layer SMIB equivalence Phase Trajectory of case 2 via direct SMIB equivalence Phase Trajectory of case 2 via two-layer SMIB equivalence Instability Detection Point 

> Mode 1
> Mode 3
> Mode 2
> Speed Deviation  пҒ„пҒ·( p.u. )

Angle пҒӨ( rad )

> Mode 1

Fig. 6 Phase trajectories of the equivalent SMIB system s in case 1 and 2 

Fig. 6 gives t he final SMIB phase trajectories after the 2 nd 

layer equivalence. Soli d lines show the phase trajectories 

obtained by the proposed two -layer SMIB equivalence method .

By contrast , dash lines show the phase trajectories obtained by 

direct SMIB equivalence method . As  Fig. 6 shows , these phase 

trajectories obtained by two different ways are entir ely identical ,

which demonstrates the validity of the two -layer SMIB 

eq uivalence framework . It is noted that t he phase trajectories in 

case 1 are segmented because of the change s of CMs .

The instability index c is computed at each moment to 

identify the transient stability in real time, as shown in the blue 

line in  Fig. 7 (a) and (b). It shows that c is alway s negative in 

case 1, indicat ing that case 1 is transient stable. In case 2, c

changes from negative to positive at 0.65s , indicating that the 

transient instability is detected at this moment. As  Fig. 6 shows ,

the phase trajectories in the two critical cases are quite similar 

in the beginning stage after the disturbance . However, the 

proposed instability index can still correctly identify the 

different transient stability in two cases .

To highlight the accuracy and practicality of the proposed 

instability index , we compare it against other convexity -

concavity based instability indexes . The instability indexes 

involved can refer to [24] and [26] . Table 2 summarizes the 

formula, required variables, number of data , and instability 

criterion of three instability indexes. It shows that the index пҒӯ

in [24] requires extra information about the post -fault stable 

equilibrium point which is , however, difficult to obtain in the 

practical power system. The index пҒҙ in [26] requires the most 

data , and the calculation includes multiple differential 

operations . Compared with these two indexes, the index c

proposed in this paper requires the le ast data and takes the 

minimum calculation. 

TABLE 2 COMPARISON OF THREE INSTABILITY INDEX ES BASED ON 

> CONVEXITY

-CONCAVITY OF PHASE TRAJECTORY 

Instability index  required 

variables 

number 

of data 

instability 

criterion ( )[ ( ) ( )] ( )( ) [ ( ) ( )] ( )           

> sep sep
> tttttttttttttt

пҒӨпҒӨпҒ· пҒ· пҒ·пҒӯпҒӨ пҒӨпҒ· пҒ· пҒ·пғ© пғ№вҲ’ пҒ„ вҲ’вҲ’ вҲ’ пҒ„ вҲ’ пҒ„ пғӘ пғәвҲ’ пҒ„ пғӘ пғәпғ« пғ»= пғ© пғ№вҲ’вҲ’ вҲ’ пҒ„ вҲ’ пҒ„ пғӘ пғәпғӘ пғәпғ« пғ», , , sep 

пҒӨ пҒ· пҒ· пҒӨ 

21

пҒӯ пҖј ( ) ( )( ) ( )( ) ( 2 )( ) ( 2 )          

> tttttttttttttt

пҒ· пҒ·пҒҙ пҒӨ пҒӨпҒ·пҒ·пҒӨпҒӨпҒ„ вҲ’ пҒ„ вҲ’ пҒ„ = вҲ’вҲ’ вҲ’ пҒ„ пҒ„ вҲ’ пҒ„ вҲ’ пҒ„ вҲ’ пҒ„вҲ’ пҒ„ вҲ’ вҲ’ пҒ„,

пҒӨ пҒ·пҒ„

30

пҒҙ пҖҫ ( ) ( )( ) ( )     

> P t P t tcttt

пҒ· пҒ·пҒ„ пҒ„ вҲ’ пҒ„ = вҲ’пҒ„ пҒ„ вҲ’ пҒ„ , P

пҒ·пҒ„ пҒ„

20c пҖҫ-0.009      

> -0.006
> -0.003
> 0.000
> 0.003
> 0.006 Instability Detection Point
> Mode3 Mode2
> пҒҙ
> Mode1
> 0.988
> 0.992
> 0.996
> 1.000
> 1.004
> 1.008
> пҒӯ
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
> -150
> -100
> -50
> 0
> 50
> 100
> пҒҙ
> c
> t(s)
> c
> пҒӯ

(a) -0.009         

> -0.006
> -0.003
> 0.000
> 0.003
> 0.006
> Instability Detection Point
> пҒҙ
> 0.997
> 0.998
> 0.999
> 1.000
> 1.001
> 1.002
> пҒӯ
> 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75
> -150
> -100
> -50
> 0
> 50
> 100
> c
> пҒҙпҒӯ
> c
> t(s)
> Mode1

(b) 

Fig. 7 Instability index es comparison in (a) case 1 and (b) case 2 

Fig. 7 (a) and (b) give the comparison of three instability 

indexes in case 1 and 2. For a fair comparison, the real -time > REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 7

CMs identification method is also applied when we compute пҒӯ

and пҒҙ . Fig. 7 (a) shows that although the case 1 is stable, the 

index пҒҙ wrongly identifies the system as unstable because of 

the severe noise. And the misjudgments also occur to th e index пҒӯ

. Only the proposed index c can correctly identify the 

transient stability in case 1.  Fig. 7 (b) shows all indexes can 

correctly identify the transient instability in case 2. However, 

the index пҒӯ takes more time than the proposed index c. And the 

severe noise of index пҒҙ significan tly limits its applicat ion in 

practice. T he comparison shows that the proposed instability 

index c is superior to other instability indexes in identification 

accuracy and practicality. 

To further verify the accuracy of the proposed scheme in 

general cases , we simulate three kind s of power flows, eight 

fault locations and two fault types in the 39 -bus 10 -machine 

power system. The faults are set at 0s , and then fault line s are 

cleared at 0.1s by the relay s. Thus, we obtain 48 ( 3 8 2пӮҙ пӮҙ ) cases, 

among which 32 cases are stable and 16 cases are unstable . A 

comparison of the proposed scheme and the emergency SIME 

method [3] is given in  Table 3.                             

> TABLE 3COMPARISON OF EMERGENCY SIME METHOD AND PROPOSED
> CONCAVE -CONVEX AREA METHOD
> Emergency SIME method Con cave -con vex area method
> Number of
> Cases
> Iden tified
> as stable
> Iden tified
> as unstable Accuracy Iden tified
> as stable
> Iden tified
> as unstable Accuracy
> Stable
> cases(32) 22 10 68.75% 32 010 0%
> Unstable
> cases(16) 016 10 0%016 10 0%

Table 3 shows that both the emergency SIME method and 

the proposed con cave -con vex area method can correctly 

identify the unstable cases. However, the emergency SIME 

method shows unsatisfactory accuracy in stable cases . The 

misjudgments are mainly caused by the in sufficient prediction 

accura cy of the P

пҒӨпҒ„ вҲ’ curve . In the emergency SIME method, 

a quadratic function is used to fit the P

пҒӨпҒ„ вҲ’ curve . However, 

the practical P

пҒӨпҒ„ вҲ’ curve is more complicated than the 

quadratic function due to the action s of regulators. The 

prediction error s may lead to inaccurate estimation of the 

maximum transient potent ial energy and finally result in the 

stability misjudgments . By contrast, the concave -convex area 

method is based on the real -time measurement data and does 

not require prediction. T hus , it shows higher accuracy and 

reliability .

B. 145 bus 50 -machine power system 

The proposed instability index ensures the accurate start -up 

of real -time emergency control. However, the effectiveness of 

the proposed scheme still need s to be verified , that is, the start -

up of emergency control is fast enough to restore the system to 

stability after the control . To this end , t he started -up scheme is 

further tested in the 145 -bus 50 -machine power system . Fig. 8

shows this test system consists of 5 areas and 50 machines. 

To examine the transient instability detection speed of the 

proposed start -up scheme, we test 20 unstable cases , and the 

results are given in  Table 4. The table give s the average start -

up angle s

пҒӨ and the average start -up time st of the proposed 

scheme. As reference s, two threshold -based criteria are also 

given . Criterion 1 selects the u

пҒӨ , and criterion 2 selects the 

fixed angle threshold of 180В° . Criterion 1 is the symbol of 

transient instability in conventional TSA methods , and criterion 

2 is the symbol of the out -of -step [29] . Table 4 shows that the 

proposed scheme can identify the transient instability 0.2024s 

before the criterion 1 and 0.4518s before the criterion 2 . The 

fast instability detection of the proposed scheme leaves enough 

time for the emergency control implementation .

To verify the validity of the proposed start -up scheme, we 

simulate a complete scenario of real -time emergency control in 

case 3 . The details of case 3 are given in  Table 5 which contains 

the fault occurrence, fault clearance, emergency control start -

up and implementation. Area 1 Area 2 Area 3 Area 4 Area 5                                              

> Fig. 8145 -bus 50 -machine power system
> TABLE 4COMPARISON OF THE PROPOSED SCHEME AND OTHER CRITERIA ON
> AVERAGE START -UP ANGLE AND AVERAGE START -UP TIME
> Proposed Start -up scheme Criterion 1 Criterion 2 s
> пҒӨ
> 95.63В° 124.54В° 180В° st
> 0.3182s 0.5206s 0.7700s
> Time ahead -0.2024s 0.4518s
> TABLE 5DETAILS OF CASE 3
> Description Case 3
> Fault details A t hree -phase short -circuit fault occurs on
> line 10 5at 0s ;then the line is cleared at 0. 1s.
> Emergency control
> start -up time 0. 4s
> CMs Identification G42, G43
> Emergency Control
> Implementation time 0.6 s
> Control Actions G42 60%( 1200 MW) shedding
> Final stability Stable

In case 3, the power system is unstable after the disturbance 

if no control is taken . The p roposed scheme identif ies the 

transient in stability at 0. 4s and then start the emergency control. 

The CMs identified at that moment are G42 and G43, based on 

which the control measures are determined using the trial and 

error method . A delay of 200ms is adopted in consideration of 

the communication delay and scheme computation time [36] .> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 8

Thus, the control action s are implemented at 0.6s. After the 

emergency control , the power system r eturns to stability . The 

SMIB phase trajector ies in  Fig. 9 describe the entire transient 

process of case 3 . Point a, b, c, and d represent the moment s of 

fault occurrence, fault clearance, instability detection , and 

emergency control implementation , respectively . The 

trajectories in the red lines show the system become s unstable 

without the emergency control. The blue trajectory indicates 

that the system returns to stab ility after the control. Case 3 

illustrates that the proposed start -up scheme can initiate the 

emergency control fast enough to restore the system to stab ility .

Fig. 10  gives the comparison of different instability indexes 

in case 3. It shows that all indexes can detect the transient 

instability after the fault clearance . However, the index пҒӯ takes 

more time (0.56s) than the index пҒҙ (0.39s) and the proposed 

index c (0.4s). Besides, the system returns to stability after the 

emergency control, but both пҒҙ and пҒӯ wrongly indicate that the 

system is unstable a fter the control (See the instability detection 

points after time d). By contrast , t he index c correctly indicates 

that the system is stable after the control . In short, the proposed 

instability index shows good accuracy and fast instability 

detection speed during the whole transient process. 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5                             

> -0.008
> -0.004
> 0.000
> 0.004
> 0.008
> 0.012
> 0.016
> Phase Trajectory without Emergency Control Phase Trajectory after Emergency Control
> Speed Deviation  пҒ„пҒ· (p.u.)
> Angle пҒӨ(rad)
> Mode 1 Mode 2
> a
> bcd
> Fig. 9The equivalent SMIB phase trajector ies in case 3 .
> Point a: fault occurrence, b: fault clearance, c: instability detection and d:
> emergency control implementation -0.0100
> -0.0075
> -0.0050
> -0.0025
> 0.0000
> 0.0025
> 0.0050 Instability Detection Point
> пҒҙ
> пҒҙ
> 0.996
> 0.997
> 0.998
> 0.999
> 1.000
> 1.001
> 1.002
> пҒӯ
> пҒӯ
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2
> -200
> -150
> -100
> -50
> 0
> 50
> 100
> c
> dcb
> c
> t(s)
> a
> Fig. 10 Instability index es comparison in case 3
> Line a: fault occurrence, b: fault clearance, c: instability detection and d:
> emergency control implementation

C. Computation Efficiency Comparison 

Benefiting from novel two -layer SMIB equivalence 

framework , the proposed start -up scheme also shows high 

computation efficiency . In [36] , the time for control start -up and 

decision is nearly 30ms. In [8] , the offline and online 

computation time of the TSA method is 35.26ms and 7.6ms, 

respectively . By contrast , the average computation time of the 

proposed start -up scheme is only 3.227 ms , as shown in  Table 6.

We obtain the total computation time by the sum of the 

maximum computation time in area control center s and the 

computation time in the global control center. All computation 

is done on MATL AB R2017a with an Intel i5 CPU. The 

computation time is expected to be even smaller with more 

efficient supercomputers.                       

> TABLE 6COMPUTATION TIME OF THE PROPOSED START -UP SCHEME
> Steps Computation Time
> 1st layer equivalence (maximum)
> Area g enerator sgroup ing 0.47 ms
> COI equivalence 1.2 0ms
> 2nd layer equivalence
> CMs identification 0.43 ms
> SMIB equivalence 1.1 0ms
> Index computation and judgement 0.027 ms
> Total 3.227 ms

With the increase in the number of generator s, the advantage 

of high computation efficiency of the proposed two -layer SMIB 

equivalence framework becomes more prominent.  Fig. 11  gives 

the computation time comparison between the direct SMIB 

equivalence method and the proposed two -layer SMIB 

equivalence method . The figure shows that the computation 

time of the direct equivalence method, TDirect , grow s rapidly 

with the increase in generator numbers. By contrast , the 

computation of the proposed two -layer equivalence method still 

only takes a small amount of time. For example, TDirect increase s

to 36.1ms when the number of generators is 20 00 . However, t he 

computation time using the two -layer SMIB equivalence 

method , T Two -layer , is only 4.9ms. The computation efficiency of 

the two -layer SMIB equivalence method is 7.37 times that of 

direct SMIB equivalence method. In the proposed scheme ,

generators are separated into 20 areas , and each area has an 

average of 100 generators . The total computation time is the 

sum of the maximum computation time of 1st layer equivalence 

(100 generators ) in the area control center s and the time of 2nd 

layer equivalence (20 -40 COI generators ) in the global control 

center. The a rea control centers share most of the computation al 

tasks through paralle l computing , which is the key to the high 

efficiency of the proposed method .10 100 1000            

> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> TDirect
> TTwo-layer
> 2000 500
> Computation Time (ms)
> Number of Generators
> 50
> Fig. 11 Computation t ime comparison between the direct SMIB equivalence
> method and the proposed two -layer SMIB equivalence method

In addition , the two -layer SMIB equivalence method also > REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 9

significan tly reduce s the communication burden. For the 2000 -

machine power system, all generator data needs to be uploaded 

to the global control center in the conventional direct SMIB 

equivalence method . However, in the proposed two -layer SMIB 

equivalence method , o nly the data of 20 -40 COI generators 

need s to be transmitted to the global control center . The volume 

of the data to be transmitted in the new equivalence method is 

only 1% -2% of the one in the conventional equivalence method .

The reduction in communication burden will improve the 

efficiency and accuracy of data tr ansmission , which 

undoubted ly benefits the fast and accurate start -up of real -time 

emergency control. 

D. Performance under Measurement Error s

Above simulation s assume that all PMU m easurement data 

is accurate . However, the measurement errors are unavoidable 

in the practical power system. It is thus worthwhile to assess the 

performance of the proposed method in the presence of 

measurement errors .

In this paper, the Gaussian white noise is used as the PMU 

measur ement errors. The noise is directly added to the original 

measurement data including ,

пҒӨ пҒ·пҒ„ and PпҒ„ . The IEEE standard 

requires that the total vector error (TVE) of PMU measurement 

data should be less than 1% [31] . According to the definition of 

signal -to -noise ratio (SNR) in (12 ), the commercial standard for 

PMU measurements is SNR>40dB. 20lg( )

> signal dB noise

ASNR A

=

(12 ),

where Asignal and Anoise are the amplitude of signal and noise, 

respectively. 

To fully verify the effectiveness of the proposed method 

under measurement errors , we test it under different level s of 

error s (40dB, 50dB , and 100dB) , and find that the proposed 

instability index shows high noise tolerance . Case 4 is given as 

an example to show the performance of the proposed instability 

index under measurement errors .

Case 4: In the 39 -bus 10 -machine power system, a t hree -

phase short -circuit ground fault occurs on the line 16 -17 at t=0s, 

then the fault line is eliminated at 0.1s. The system is stable 

after the disturbance. 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5        

> -60
> -40
> -20
> 0
> 20 No noise SNR=100dB SNR=50dB SNR=40dB
> Instability Index  c
> t(s)
> Instability Detection Line
> Fig. 12 Performan ce of the proposed instability index under different level s
> of measurement errors

The instability index curves under different levels of errors 

are given in  Fig. 12 . It shows that the proposed method, without 

any noise reduction measures, has nearly the same accuracy in 

scenarios where SNR=100dB as in scenarios without noise. In 

scenarios with more serio us errors where SNR=50dB or 

SNR=40dB, the instability index can still correctly indicate the 

transient stability of the power system. By contrast, other 

instability indexes, пҒҙ and пҒӯ , encounter serious misjudg ments 

under measurement errors (SNR=40dB), as shown in  Fig. 13 .

In short, the proposed method is robust to noise and is qualified 

to be a start -up scheme for real -time emergency control in the 

presence of allowable PMU measurement errors. 

However, it should be noted in  Fig. 12  that as the error level 

increases, the fluctuations of the instability index curves 

become apparent . This phenomenon increases the risk s of 

misjudgments in stable scenarios. For example, w hen the error 

level increases to SNR=30dB , TVE=3.162 %, the system is 

wrongly detected as unstable in case 4, as shown in  Fig. 14 . To 

address the misjudgments caused by severe measurement errors, 

two noise reduction measures are suggested in this paper: 1) use 

moving average filter (MAF) on the original measurement data 

and 2) use MAF on the instability index curve . The results are 

given in  Fig. 14 . The figure indicates that either of the noise 

reduction measures can avoid the misjudgments in scenarios 

with severe measurement errors. 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5             

> -60
> -40
> -20
> 0
> 20
> 40
> пҒӯ
> пҒҙ
> c
> t(s)
> c
> Instability Detection Line
> -0.3
> -0.2
> -0.1
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> пҒҙ
> 0.994
> 0.996
> 0.998
> 1.000
> 1.002
> 1.004
> пҒӯ
> Fig. 13 Instability Index Comparison under measurement errors (SNR=40dB) 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
> -120
> -80
> -40
> 0
> 40
> 80 No noise SNR=30dB Noise reduction1 Noise reduction2
> Instrability Index  c
> t(s)
> Fig. 14 Performance of the proposed instability index under severe errors
> (SNR=30dB, TVE=3.162%) and noise reduction measures

V. CONCLUSION S

In this paper, a n accurate and fast start -up scheme is proposed 

for the real -time emergency control. This work aims to ident ify 

the transient instability of the power system with the real -time 

measurement data from PMUs and start the emergency control 

to restore the system to stability. 

To achieve this goal, a new instability index is firstly 

proposed based on the concave -convex area. It shows 

su perior ity in accuracy, reliability and noise tolerance when > REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 10 

compared with other instability indexes . Besides, a real -time 

CMs identification algorithm is used to track the change s of 

CMs . It ensures the accuracy of SMIB equivalence at each 

moment . Then a novel two -layer SMIB equivalence framework 

is presented to improve the computation efficiency and reduce 

the communication burden . The framework greatly promotes 

the real -time application of the proposed method in the large -

scale power system . Finally, t he simulations in two test systems 

verify the effectiveness of the scheme. 

REFERENCE 

[1] J. J. Q. Yu, D. J. Hill, A. Y. S. Lam, J. Gu and V. O. K. Li, "Intelligent 

Time -Adaptive Transient Stabil ity Assessment System," IEEE Trans Power 

Syst. , vol.33, no.1, pp.1049 -1058, 2018 

[2] M. A. M. Ariff and B. C. Pal, "Adaptive Protection and Control in the Power 

System for Wide -Area Blackout Prevention," IEEE Trans. Power Delivery ,

vol.31, no.4, pp.1815 -1825, 2016 

[3] M. Pavella, D. Ernst and D. Ruiz -Vega, Transient stability of power systems: 

a unified approach to assessment and control , Berlin, Germany: Springer 

Science & Business Media, 2012, 

[4] M. Oluic, M. Ghandhari and B. Berggren, "Methodology for Rotor Angle 

Transient Stability Assessment in Parameter Space," IEEE Trans. Power 

Syst ., Vol.32, No.2 , pp. 1202 -1211, 2017 

[5] J. Gou, Y. Liu, J. Liu, G. A. Taylor and M. M. Alamuti, "Novel pair -wise 

relative energy function for transient stability analysis a nd real -time 

emergency control," IET Gener., Transm. Distrib. , Vol.11, No.18 , pp. 4565 -

4575, 2017 

[6] X. Xu, H. Zhang, C. Li, Y. Liu, W. Li and V. Terzija, "Optimization of the 

Event -Driven Emergency Load -Shedding Considering Transient Security 

and Stability C onstraints," IEEE Trans. Power Syst ., vol.32, no.4, pp.2581 -

2592, 2017 

[7] Z. Li, G. Yao, G. Geng and Q. Jiang, "An Efficient Optimal Control Method 

for Open -Loop Transient Stability Emergency Control," IEEE Trans. Power 

Syst ., vol.32, no.4, pp.2704 -2713, 2017 

[8] P. Bhui and N. Senroy, "Real Time Prediction and Control of Transient 

Stability Using Transient Energy Function," IEEE Trans. Power Syst .,

Vol.32, No.2 , pp. 923 -934 , 2017 

[9] S. Fang, H. Zhang and G. Xue, "Instability prediction of the inter -connected 

power grids based on rotor angle measurement," Int. J. Elec . Power Energ .

Syst . , vol.88, pp.21 -32, 2017 

[10] D. Huang, X. Yang, S. Chen, and T. Meng, "Wide -area measurement 

system -based model -free approach of post -fault rotor angle trajectory 

prediction for on -line transient instability detection ", IET Gener., Transm. 

Distrib. , vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 2425 -2435, 2018. 

[11] A. Shamisa, B. Majidi, and J. Patra, "Sliding -Window -Based Real -Time 

Model Order Reduction for Stability Prediction in Smart Grid ", IEEE Trans. 

Power Syst. , pp. 1, 2018. 

[12] G. Qun and S. M. Rovnyak, "Decision Trees Using Synchronized Phasor 

Measurements for Wide -Area Response -Based Control," IEEE Trans. 

Power Syst. , vol.26, no.2, pp.855 -861, 2011 

[13] M. He, V . Vittal and J. Zhang, "Online dynamic security assessment with 

missing pmu measurements: A data mining approach," IEEE Trans. Power 

Syst. , vol.28, no.2, pp.1969 -1977, 2013 

[14] A. G. Bahbah and A. A. Girgis, "New Method for Generators' Angles and 

Angular Velocities Prediction for Transient Stability Assessment of 

Multimachine Power S ystems Using Recurrent Artificial Neural Network," 

IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol.19, no.2, pp.1015 -1022, 2004 

[15] R. Zhang, Y . Xu, Z . Dong and K . P. Wong, "Post -disturbance transient 

stability assessment of power systems by a self -adaptive intelligent system," 

IET Gener. Transm. Distrib. , vol.9, no.3, pp.296 -305, 2015 

[16] S. Mehraeen, S . Jagannathan and M . L. Crow, "Power System Stabilization 

Using Adaptive Neural Network -Based Dynamic Surface Control," IEEE 

Trans. Power Syst. , vol.26, no.2, pp.669 -680, 2011 

[17] AD. Raj apakse, F. Gomez, K. Nanayakkara, P. A. Crossley and V. V. 

Terzija, "Rotor Angle Instability Prediction Using Post -Disturbance 

Voltage Trajectories," IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol.25, no.2, pp.947 -956, 

2010 

[18] F. R. Gomez, AD. Rajapakse, U. D. Annakkage and IT . Fernando, 

"Support Vector Machine -Based Algorithm for Post -Fault Transient 

Stability Status Prediction Using Synchronized Measurements," IEEE 

Trans. Power Syst. , vol.26, no.3, pp.1474 -1483, 2011 

[19] B. Wang, B . Fang, Y . Wang, H . Liu and Y. Liu, "Power System Transient 

Stability Assessment Based on Big Data and the Core Vector Machine," 

IEEE Trans. Smart Grid , vol.7, no.5, pp.2561 -2570, 2016 

[20] J. C. Cepeda, J . L. Rueda, D . G. Colome and D. E. Echeverria, "Real -time 

transient stability assessment based on centre -of -inertia estimation from 

phasor measurement unit records," IET Gener. Transm. Distrib. , vol.8, no.8, 

pp.1363 -1376, 2014 

[21] S. Dasgupta, M . Paramasivam, U . Vaidya and V . Ajjarapu, "PMU -Based 

Model -Free Approach for Real -Time Rotor Angle Monitoring," IEEE T ra ns. 

Power Syst. , vol.30, no.5, pp.2818 -2819, 2015 

[22] D. R. Gurusinghe and A . D. Rajapakse, "Post -Disturbance Transient 

Stability Status Prediction Using Synchrophasor Measurements," IEEE 

Trans. Power Syst. , vol.31, no.5, pp.3656 -3664, 2016 

[23] A. Shamisa and M . Karrari, " Model free graphical index for transient 

stability limit based on on -line single machine equivalent system 

identification," IET G ener. Transm. Distrib. , vol.11, no.2, pp.314 -321, 2017 

[24] L. Wang and A . A. Girgis, "A new method for power system transient 

instability detection," IEEE Trans. Power Delivery , vol.12, no.3, pp. 1082 -

1089, 1997 

[25] H. Xie, B . Zhang, G . Yu, Y . Li, P . Li, D . Zhou and F. Yao, "Power System 

Transient Stability Detection Based on Characteristic Concave or Convex 

of Trajectory," in Transmission and Distribution Conference and Exhibition: 

Asia and Pacific, 2 005 IEEE/PES , 2005, PP. 1 -6

[26] B. Zhang, S. Yang, H. Wang, S. Ma and L. Wu, " Closed -loop control of 

power system transient stability (2 ): transient instability detection method 

of multi -machine power system ," Electr. Power Autom . Equip ., no .09, pp.1 -

6, 2014 (in Chinese) 

[27] Y. Xu, Z. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. Fei, and W. Liu, "Real -Time Compressive 

Sensing based Control Strategy for a Multi -area Power System ", IEEE 

Trans. Smart Grid , vol.9 no.5, pp. 4293 -4302, 2018 

[28] S. Zhao, H. Jia, and D. Fang, "Partition -composition method for online 

detection of interconnected power system transient stability ", IET Gener. 

Transm. Distrib. , vol. 10, no. 14, pp. 3529 -3538, 2016. 

[29] P. Kundur, N . J. Balu and M . G. Lauby, Power system stability and control ,

New York: McGraw -hill, 1994, 

[30] D. E. Echeverria, J. C. Cepeda and D. G. Colome, "Critical machine 

identification for power systems transient stability problems using data 

mining," in IEEE PES Transmission & Distribution Conference and 

Exposition -Latin America (PES T&D -LA), 2014 , 2014, 

[31] IEEE Standard for Synchrophasor Measurements for Power Systems, 

C37.118.1, 2011 

[32] J. Machowski, J. Bialek, J.R. Bumby, and J. Bumby, Power system 

dynamics and stability , John Wiley & Sons, 1997. 

[33] IEEE 39 -bus 10 -machine power system model . [Online ]. Available: 

http://www.s el.eesc.usp.br/ieee/index.htm 

[34] V. Vittal, D. Martin, R. Chu, J. Fish, J. C. Giri, C. K. Tang, F. Eugenio 

Villaseca and R. G. Farmer, "Transient stability test systems for direct 

stability methods," IEEE T rans. Power Syst. , vol.7, no.1, pp.37, 1992 

[35] IEEE recommended practice for excitatio n system models for power 

system stability studies." IEEE Std 421.5 TM , 2016. 

[36] W. Yu, Y . Xue, J . Luo, M . Ni, H . Tong and T. Huang, " An UHV Grid 

Security and Stability Defense System: Considering the Risk of Power 

System Communication," IEEE T rans. Smart Grid , vol.7, no.1, pp.491 -500, 

2016 > REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 11 

Songhao Yang (SвҖҷ18 ) received the B.S. 

degree in electrical engineering from XiвҖҷan 

Jiaotong University, XiвҖҷan, China, in 2012. 

He is currently working toward the Ph.D. 

degree at the School of Electrical 

Engineering, XiвҖҷan Jiaotong University. 

Meanwhile, he is also pursuing his Ph. D. 

degree in engineering at Tokushima 

University. 

His main field of interest s include optimal PMUs placement ,

power system stability assessment and control. 

Zhiguo Hao (MвҖҷ10) was born in Ordos, 

China, in 1976. He received the B.Sc. an d

Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering 

from XiвҖҷan Jiaotong University, XiвҖҷan, 

China, in 1998 and 2007, respectively. 

He has been an Associate Professor with 

the Electrical Engineering Department, 

XiвҖҷan Jiaotong University, since 2013. His 

research inter est includes power system 

protection. 

Baohui Zhang (SMвҖҷ99 -FвҖҷ19) was born in 

Hebei, China, in 1953. He received the M. 

Eng. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical 

engineering from XiвҖҷan Jiaotong 

University, XiвҖҷan, China, in 1982 and 1988, 

respectively. 

Since 1992, he has been a Professor with 

the Electrical Engineering Department, 

XiвҖҷan Jiaotong University. His research 

interests include power system analysis, control, 

communication, and protection. 

Masahide Hojo (SвҖҷ98 -MвҖҷ99) was born 

Tokushima, Japan. He received the M.S. 

degree in engineering from Kobe 

University in 1996 and the Ph.D. degree in 

engineering from Osak a University in 

1999. 

He is currently a professor at Tokushima 

University. His research interests include 

the advanced power system control by 

power electronics technologies, and analysis of power systems.