Title: Structure-Aware Commitment Reduction for Network-Constrained Unit Commitment with Solver-Preserving Guarantees

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.02788v1

Published Time: Mon, 06 Apr 2026 00:35:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
> IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS 1

# Structure-Aware Commitment Reduction for Network-Constrained Unit Commitment with Solver-Preserving Guarantees 

Guangwen Wang, Student Member, IEEE; Jiaqi Wu, Student Member, IEEE; Yang Weng, Senior Member, IEEE; 

and Baosen Zhang, Member, IEEE 

Abstract —The growing number of individual generating units, hybrid resources, and security constraints has significantly in-creased the computational burden of network-constrained unit commitment (UC), where most solution time is spent explor-ing branch-and-bound trees over unit-hour binary variables. To reduce this combinatorial burden, recent approaches have explored learning-based guidance to assist commitment decisions. However, directly using tools such as large language models (LLMs) to predict full commitment schedules is unreliable, as infeasible or inconsistent binary decisions can violate inter-temporal constraints and degrade economic optimality. This paper proposes a solver-compatible dimensionality reduction framework for UC that exploits structural regularities in com-mitment decisions. Instead of generating complete schedules, the framework identifies a sparse subset of structurally stable commitment binaries to fix prior to optimization. One imple-mentation uses an LLM to select these variables. The LLM does not replace the optimization process but provides partial variable restriction, while all constraints and remaining decisions are handled by the original MILP solver, which continues to enforce network, ramping, reserve, and security constraints. We formally show that the masked problem defines a reduced feasible region of the original UC model, thereby preserving feasibility and enabling solver-certified optimality within the restricted space. Experiments on IEEE 57-bus, RTS 73-bus, IEEE 118-bus, and augmented large-scale cases, including security-constrained variants, demonstrate consistent reductions in branch-and-bound nodes and solution time, achieving order-of-magnitude speedups on high-complexity instances while maintaining near-optimal objective values. 

NOMENCLATURE 

Sets 

G Set of generators, indexed by g.

N Set of buses, indexed by n.

g(n) Set of generators located at bus n.

K Set of transmission lines, indexed by k.

T Set of time periods, indexed by t.

F Set of generator–time indices (g, t ) whose com-mitment variables are fixed prior to optimiza-tion. 

X Feasible region of the original UC formulation. 

XF Feasible region after commitment variable re-striction. 

Parameters 

cg Production cost coefficient of generator g.

cN L g No-load cost of generator g.

The authors Guangwen Wang, Jiaqi Wu, and Yang Weng are with the School of Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ . Baosen Zhang is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. 

cSU g Startup cost of generator g.

P min  

> g

Minimum operating capacity of generator g.

P max  

> g

Maximum operating capacity of generator g.

U T g Minimum up time of generator g.

DT g Minimum down time of generator g.

P max  

> k

Thermal limit of transmission line k.

dnt Demand at bus n at time t.

RHR g Ramp-rate limit of generator g.

RSU g Startup ramp limit of generator g.

RSD g Shutdown ramp limit of generator g.

ug0 Initial commitment state of generator g.

Pg0 Initial dispatch level of generator g.

P T DF k,n Power transfer distribution factor from bus n to line k.

Variables 

Pgt Real-power output of generator g at time t.

ugt Commitment status of generator g at time t.

vgt Startup indicator of generator g at time t.

wgt Shutdown indicator of generator g at time t.

fkt Line flow on transmission line k at time t.

¯ugt Fixed commitment value imposed on selected generator–time pairs. I. I NTRODUCTION 

The unit commitment (UC) problem is a fundamental part of power system operations [1], [2]. It determines the on and off status and dispatch of generating units over a planning hori-zon while satisfying demand balance, reserve requirements, capacity limits, ramping constraints, and minimum up and down times [3]. If DC power flow equations are used, the UC problem becomes a mixed-integer linear program [4]. Modern UC instances are also fairly large, often involve hundreds of generators, detailed network constraints, and multi-period horizons [2], [5]. Therefore, the resulting problems can contain tens of thousands of binary commitment variables, making it nontrivial to solve even with state-of-the-art computing resources [6]. At the same time, the sizes of the models are increasing rapidly because of the need to integrate variable large loads, storage, renewable energy, and hybrid resources. The increase in complexity further enlarges the number of unit-hour bina-ries and strengthens temporal coupling among them [7], [8]. Consequently, the discrete search space grows rapidly with system scale, making the problem still more challenging to solve. To cope with the growth in problem complexity, classical ac-celeration techniques have focused on tightening formulations,  

> arXiv:2604.02788v1 [cs.LG] 3 Apr 2026 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS 2

improving warm starts, and leveraging decomposition strate-gies to guide or prune the MILP search [9]. These approaches improve solver efficiency and reduce per-node overhead, but do not alter the number of free binary commitment variables that define the size of the discrete search space [4]. As system models become larger and more granular, the branch-and-bound process remains the main computational bottleneck. More recently, learning-based approaches have been pro-posed to guide commitment decisions and accelerate the MILP solution process. Some methods predict unit-hour commitment patterns from forecasts and covariates, using supervised mod-els to generate warm starts or partially fixed commitment vari-ables [10], [11]. Others integrate learned signals into the MILP solver, such as through branching guidance or selective binary assignments that aim to reduce branch-and-bound exploration [12], [13]. In addition, learning has been combined with decomposition-based UC formulations to estimate subproblem quality and prioritize promising substructures. Although these techniques lead to speedups in stable oper-ating regimes, they rely heavily on historical labeled data and often attempt to approximate or replace part of the discrete search [14]. But generating a good set of training data can be prohibitively expensive, given the need to solve a large number of MILP problems. More importantly, when system conditions shift or new resources are introduced, learned commitment patterns can lose accuracy and produce infeasible or inconsis-tent decisions [15]. The solver must then override or correct this guidance, often requiring additional MILP solves that reduce the net runtime gains. Structurally, these approaches do not reduce the number of free commitment binaries in a way that preserves solver-certified feasibility and optimality. Instead, they rely on prediction in a problem where exact constraint enforcement and discrete consistency are essential. As we can see, these approaches do not explicitly exploit structural regularities in commitment decisions to reduce the dimensionality of the binary search space. To address this structural limitation, we propose a structure-aware commitment reduction framework that exploits the observation that many unit-hour commitment decisions remain stable across similar operating conditions. Rather than relying on prediction to generate full schedules, the method identifies a sparse subset of structurally stable commitment variables that can be fixed prior to optimization. One practical imple-mentation of this idea uses a large language model (LLM) to select these variables. This design reduces the number of free commitment binaries while leaving the original UC formulation unchanged. The MILP solver then determines the remaining commitment and dispatch decisions and enforces all operational and network constraints exactly. By reducing the number of free commitment binaries while retaining solver authority, the method directly reduces branch-and-bound ex-ploration without compromising feasibility. We show that even by fixing a small number of commitment variables, we can drastically reduce the solving time. We formally prove that the modified problem defines a subset of the original UC feasible region, ensuring that feasibility is preserved by the solver. This restriction-based framework operates entirely within the original UC formulation and does not alter the underlying optimization model. In addition to the commitment fixing strategy, we introduce a pre-solve feasibility check that verifies necessary logical consistency conditions before invoking the MILP solver. This step avoids launching solves that are trivially infeasible and reduces redundant solver calls under strict market timelines. The number of fixed commitment binaries is explicitly limited to avoid excessive restriction of the feasible region and to control objective deviation. We formally show that the resulting problem defines a subset of the original UC feasible region. Therefore, feasibility is preserved by the solver and optimality is certified within the reduced commitment space. Together, these design choices reduce branch-and-bound exploration while preserving exact constraint enforcement, and they remain effective even when historical commitment data are limited or system configura-tions change. The proposed framework is evaluated on the IEEE 57-bus, RTS 73-bus, and IEEE 118-bus systems, along with augmented 118-bus cases with additional generators, to exam-ine scalability under increasing commitment dimensionality. Experiments include a setting without access to historical commitment schedules, load uncertainty perturbations, and a year-long sequence of daily UC instances. Baselines include the original MILP solve and data-driven commitment fixing strategies based on clustering and nearest-neighbor matching, Performance is evaluated using solve time, branch-and-bound nodes, simplex iterations, and objective deviation relative to the MILP reference, with feasibility preserved by the un-changed UC formulation. Results show consistent reductions in explored nodes and wall-clock time across system sizes, achieving substantial speedups while maintaining near-optimal objective values. Results show consistent reductions in branch-and-bound nodes and solve time across system sizes. The proposed method achieves up to 6.7x speedup (e.g., on the RTS 73 -bus system) with less than 0.3% objective deviation from the MILP baseline. These improvements remain even when no historical commitment schedules are provided. This demonstrating effectiveness under limited training data and changing system conditions. We note that there is an orthogonal line of work that uses LLM to translate natural language description to optimization problems [16]–[20]. In contrast, our paper is on solving the underlying optimization problem using LLMs and our results can be integrated into these or more conventional solvers. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the problem formulation for classic UC and LLM-Assisted UC problem formulation. Section III details task decomposition, context engineering and prompt design. Sec-tion IV proves some analytical insights into our proposed framework. Section V provides numerical validation of the proposed approaches. Conclusions and discussions are pre-sented in Section VI. II. P ROBLEM FORMULATION 

We consider a network-constrained unit commitment (UC) problem over a discrete time horizon T . Let G denote the set of generators and N the set of buses. The objective is to IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS 3

determine the binary commitment decisions and continuous dispatch levels that minimize total production cost while satisfying operational and transmission constraints under a DC power flow approximation. Let ugt ∈ { 0, 1} denote the on/off commitment status of generator g at time t, Pgt its real-power output, and vgt and wgt the startup and shutdown indicators, respectively. The network-constrained UC formulation is given by 

min X

> t∈T

X

> g∈G

 cg Pgt + cN L g ugt + cSU g vgt 

 (1a) s.t. P min  

> g

ugt ≤ Pgt ≤ P max  

> g

ugt , ∀g, t (1b) 

ugt − ug,t −1 = vgt − wgt , ∀g, t (1c) 

> t

X 

> s=t−U T g+1

vgs ≤ ugt , ∀g, t = U T g , . . . , T (1d) 

> t

X 

> s=t−DT g+1

wgs ≤ 1 − ugt ,

∀g, t = DT g , . . . , T (1e) 

Pgt − Pg,t −1 ≤ RHR g ug,t −1 + RSU g vgt , ∀g, t (1f) 

Pg,t −1 − Pgt ≤ RHR g ugt + RSD g wgt , ∀g, t (1g) 

X

> g∈g(n)

Pgt − dnt = X

> k∈K

an,k fkt , ∀n, t (1h) 

fkt = bk(θik ,t − θjk ,t ), ∀k, t (1i) 

− P max  

> k

≤ fkt ≤ P max  

> k

, ∀k, t (1j) 

ugt , v gt , w gt ∈ { 0, 1}, ∀g, t. (1k) In (1), the objective (1a) minimizes total generation, no-load, and startup costs. Constraints (1b)–(1g) enforce generator capacity, logical consistency, minimum up/down time, and ramping limits. Constraints (1h)–(1j) enforce nodal power balance and transmission security under a DC power flow model. One bus is selected as the reference angle. 

Problem Statement: Given system parameters and demand profiles, solve the network-constrained UC problem (1) to obtain a globally optimal commitment and dispatch schedule under the mixed-integer formulation. III. C OMMITMENT -R ESTRICTED UNIT COMMITMENT 

FRAMEWORK 

Solving (1) directly as a single MILP can be computation-ally demanding because branch-and-bound exploration over unit-hour commitment variables dominates runtime in large systems. To reduce the discrete search dimension while pre-serving the original UC structure, we introduce a commitment variable restriction framework. 

A. Restricted Unit Commitment Formulation 

A large language model (LLM) selects a subset of genera-tor–time indices F ⊆ G × T and corresponding fixed values 

¯ugt ∈ { 0, 1} for (g, t ) ∈ F . The restriction is imposed directly in the UC formulation through 

ugt = ¯ ugt , ∀(g, t ) ∈ F . (2) All remaining decision variables remain free and are opti-mized by the MILP solver subject to the full set of constraints in (1). Before incorporating the selected restriction set F, a pre-solve feasibility verification step checks necessary logical consistency conditions, including ramping feasibility and basic supply–demand consistency. The goal is to prevent restrictions that would make the UC problem infeasible. Let X denote the feasible region of the original UC formulation and XF the feasible region after imposing (2). By construction, XF ⊆ X .Therefore, any solution returned by the solver remains feasible for the original UC model, and global optimality is certified within the reduced feasible region XF .

Fig. 1: Workflow of the proposed solver-preserving com-mitment variable reduction method. An LLM generates a sparse commitment restriction set, a feasibility screening step removes inconsistent selections, and the resulting reduced UC problem is solved by a MILP solver with full constraint en-forcement and certified optimality within the restricted space. 

B. LLM-Based Restriction Generation 

Our solver-coupled design employs an LLM to generate a sparse freeze mask that fixes only a small fraction of binary on/off decisions, thereby reducing the combinatorial search space for MILP solvers. By coupling high-level guidance from the LLM with exact optimization, the method preserves feasibility and solution quality while accelerating solution time. When historical UC solutions are available, we select the 

H most load-similar past days based on the 24-hour demand profile. For each selected day, we provide its 24-hour demand vector and the corresponding MILP commitment schedule as a compact reference. This guides the LLM to identify commitment decisions that remain consistent across similar operating conditions, rather than generating a full schedule. In addition, generator characteristics (e.g., Pmin /Pmax , minimum up/down times, and initial on/off status) are provided once as a JSON object, while the target-day 24-hour nodal demands are supplied as a simple array. No network, ramping, or reserve parameters are exposed to the model, and these elements remain strictly within the solver. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS 4

We decompose the mask-generation prompt into distinct parts, including task description, input context, output specifi-cation, and mask rules, to ensure clarity and consistency. The model is explicitly instructed not to produce a full schedule, but to return a strict JSON-formatted array of tuples (t, g, u )

indicating that unit g should be fixed to state u ∈ { 0, 1}

at hour t. A per-hour limit K is imposed on the number of commitment variables that may be fixed, preventing excessive restriction of the feasible region. The LLM is configured to produce consistent outputs across repeated runs. When uncertainty arises, the model is instructed to restrict fewer units and defer the remaining commitment decisions to the MILP solver. The prompt below illustrates this structure.                                                                                                                

> Commitment Restriction Specification Provided to the LLM
> Task: Identify asparse set of unit--hour commitment variables to fix in a24-hour UC problem. Do not generate acomplete schedule. Only specify selected commitment decisions; all remaining decisions are determined by the MILP solver.
> Input Data:
> •Generator parameters for each unit g:
> Pmin
> g,Pmax
> g,minimum up/down times, and initial status.
> •Hourly demand profile for the 24-hour horizon.
> Output Format: Return astructured list of tuples (t, g, u )indicating that unit gis fixed to commitment state u∈{0,1}at hour t.No explanatory text should be included.
> Restriction Guidelines:
> 1) At each hour t,fix at most Kunits to avoid excessive feasible-region reduction. 2) Favor commitment patterns consistent with minimum up/down requirements and initial conditions. 3) When uncertain, restrict fewer units and allow the solver to determine the remaining commitments.

The structured specification above ensures that the model output is well-defined, reproducible, and directly compatible with existing UC implementations. By separating task descrip-tion, input data, and restriction guidelines, the interface pro-motes consistent decision patterns across operating scenarios. For each daily UC instance, the model receives the generator parameters and the 24-hour demand profile, and returns a structured list of unit–hour commitment restrictions. Because the output follows a predefined schema, the selected (t, g, u )

tuples can be incorporated directly into the UC model without additional interpretation, enabling seamless integration with standard MILP-based workflows. 

C. Applying Restrictions and Solving the MILP 

Once a freeze mask M = [( t, g, u )] is returned, it is injected into the UC model. For each tuple (t, g, u ) in the mask, the corresponding variable is set to u and fixed. All remaining operational and network constraints are enforced by the MILP solver, subject to the fixed commitment decisions.                                                                            

> Reduced UC Solution Procedure
> 1) Data initialization: Load network topology, transmission limits, generator parameters, and the time-indexed demand profile.
> 2) Scenario update: Set the hourly demand values for the current UC instance.
> 3) Commitment reset: Release previously fixed commitment variables to ensure aclean model state.
> 4) Commitment restriction: For each
> (t, g, u )∈M,fix the corresponding unit--hour commitment variable in the UC formulation.
> 5) MILP optimization: Solve the resulting reduced UC MILP with full enforcement of operational, inter-temporal, and transmission constraints.
> 6) Result extraction: Obtain the commitment schedule, dispatch levels, and objective value for the restricted problem.

D. Solution Procedure with Feedback 

As summarized in Algorithm 1, the procedure takes as inputs the generator parameters, hourly demand profile, restric-tion limit K, and optional screening thresholds, and outputs the final commitment and dispatch schedules. An optional pre-solve verification step is used to detect restriction sets that would render the UC problem infeasible. A post-solve validation step may be applied to confirm that operational and network constraints remain satisfied under the restricted solution. Together, these steps provide a structured integration of commitment restriction within a standard MILP-based UC solution process. IV. S TRUCTURAL BASIS FOR COMMITMENT RESTRICTION IN UNIT COMMITMENT 

This section provides a structural explanation for why data-driven commitment restriction can be effective in network-constrained unit commitment (UC) problems. Rather than viewing the LLM as a predictive optimizer, we interpret its role as identifying commitment variables that are structurally stable under recurring operating regimes. The solver remains responsible for enforcing all operational and network con-straints, while the restriction mechanism seeks to reduce the dimensionality of the discrete search space by fixing commit-ment decisions that are unlikely to change across feasible and near-optimal solutions. In practical power system operations, commitment sched-ules are not arbitrary. They are strongly influenced by load trajectories, generator characteristics, minimum up/down re-quirements, and ramping capabilities. Across days with sim-ilar demand patterns and resource availability, many com-mitment decisions exhibit regular and repeatable structure. For example, large base-load units are typically committed during sustained high-demand periods, while peaking units are activated during predictable load ramps. Similarly, units with long minimum up times, once committed, are typically IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS 5

Algorithm 1 LLM-Assisted UC with masking and feedback 

Require: Generator metadata G, nodal demands {Pd(t)}24 

> t=1

,freeze cap K, optional screening thresholds 

Ensure: Commitment schedule {Ut,g } and dispatch {Pg,t } 

> 1:

Build the UC MILP model with network and operational constraints  

> 2:

Override bus loads to match the current scenario  

> 3:

Query the LLM with the structured prompt to obtain a sparse mask M 

> 4:

if pre-solver screening is enabled then  

> 5:

Check whether the unfrozen generators can meet de-mand at each hour; if not, request a revised mask  

> 6:

end if  

> 7:

unfix all commitments Ut,g ; fix Ut,g ← u for each 

(t, g, u ) ∈ M  

> 8:

solve the UC MILP; record the resulting commitments and dispatch  

> 9:

if post-solver validation is enabled then  

> 10:

Fix Ut,g and run a fast economic dispatch or DC/AC flow to confirm reserve and line limits  

> 11:

if violations occur then  

> 12:

Summarise the binding constraints and request a revised mask  

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

end if  

> 15:

return {Ut,g }, {Pg,t }, objective value, and any validation logs required to remain online for multiple consecutive hours, resulting in contiguous commitment blocks in the schedule. The proposed restriction framework leverages this structural regularity. Instead of predicting the full commitment schedule, the LLM identifies a sparse subset of unit–hour commitment variables whose values are frequently stable under similar operating conditions. These variables are then fixed prior to optimization, thereby reducing the number of binary decisions explored in branch-and-bound, while leaving the remainder of the UC problem unchanged. 

A. Operating Regimes and Commitment Regularity 

Daily load trajectories define recurring operating regimes, including low-load overnight hours, morning ramping periods, daytime high-demand intervals, and evening peak conditions. Although the exact dispatch levels and marginal costs may vary across days, the qualitative structure of commitment deci-sions often remains similar under similar operating conditions. Let x denote the input consisting of generator metadata and a 24-hour load profile. The restriction mechanism can be interpreted as mapping x to a sparse commitment restriction set M(x). When two input scenarios x1 and x2 correspond to similar operating conditions, such as comparable peak demand levels and ramping characteristics, their resulting commitment patterns often share common structural elements. In particular, certain commitment variables may consistently take the same values across feasible and near-optimal solutions under those conditions. This motivates the approximate relation 

M(x1) ≈ M (x2), (3) when x1 and x2 represent similar operating regimes. Notably, this mechanism does not imply that the full commitment schedule is uniquely determined by the demand profile. In network-constrained UC, multiple feasible com-mitment combinations may satisfy the same load conditions, particularly for marginal and fast-start units. These units often provide flexibility and can switch status across near-optimal solutions. In contrast, commitment decisions for large base-load generators or for hours with tight capacity margins tend to be more constrained and therefore exhibit limited variability across feasible solutions. By fixing commitment variables that consistently take the same value under similar loading condi-tions, the proposed framework reduces the effective number of binary variables explored in branch-and-bound, while leaving economically sensitive decisions to the MILP solver. 

B. Temporal Coupling in Unit Commitment 

Unit commitment decisions are inherently inter-temporal due to minimum up-time, minimum down-time, and ramping constraints. The commitment variable ug,t is not indepen-dent across hours. Once a unit is started, minimum up-time constraints require it to remain online for a prescribed number of subsequent periods. Similarly, shutdown decisions impose minimum down-time restrictions, and ramp-rate limits constrain feasible transitions between consecutive dispatch levels. As a result, feasible commitment schedules exhibit contiguous commitment intervals rather than isolated hour-by-hour switching. For generators with long minimum up-time requirements or limited ramping flexibility, commitment decisions over several consecutive hours are strongly coupled. In many practical instances, once such a unit is committed during a high-demand interval, its status over the next several hours is effectively constrained by operational limits. This temporal coupling provides a structural opportunity for binary reduction. If a generator is consistently committed over a sustained interval under similar loading conditions, fixing the corresponding sequence of unit-hour variables can reduce the depth and width of branch-and-bound exploration. Notably, the proposed approach restricts only a subset of commitment vari-ables, leaving flexible and economically marginal decisions to the MILP solver. To avoid infeasible reductions, a pre-solve screening step verifies basic consistency conditions before fixing commitments. These checks include aggregate capacity sufficiency and ramping feasibility under the proposed fixed decisions. The full UC formulation, including network and operational constraints, is then enforced by the MILP solver without relaxation. The number of restricted variables per hour is explicitly capped to limit feasible-region reduction and to control potential objective deviation. 

C. Feasibility and Optimality Properties 

We now formalize the structural properties of the pro-posed restriction mechanism relative to the original network-constrained UC formulation. Let F denote the feasible region IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS 6

of the original UC problem defined by constraints (1b)–(1j). Let M ⊆ { (g, t )} denote the set of restricted unit-hour pairs, and define the restricted feasible region 

FM := {(u, P, v, w, f, θ ) ∈ F | ug,t = ¯ ug,t , ∀(g, t ) ∈ M },

where ¯ug,t ∈ { 0, 1} are the fixed commitment values. 

Proposition 1 (Feasibility Preservation) . If FM is nonempty, then any solution returned by the MILP solver for the re-stricted problem satisfies all constraints of the original UC formulation. Proof. The restricted UC problem is obtained by adding equality constraints ug,t = ¯ ug,t for (g, t ) ∈ M to the original MILP. All other constraints remain unchanged. Therefore, any feasible solution of the restricted problem satisfies the full set of original UC constraints by construction. 

Theorem 1 (Reduced Feasible Region) . The restricted feasible region satisfies FM ⊆ F . Consequently, 

min  

> x∈F

f (x) ≤ min 

> x∈F M

f (x),

where f (x) denotes the UC objective. Proof. By definition, FM is formed by intersecting F with additional linear equality constraints. Hence FM ⊆ F . The objective inequality follows directly from minimization over a subset. 

Remark 1 (Optimality in Restricted Space) . If x⋆M is the optimal solution of the restricted UC problem, then x⋆M

is globally optimal over FM . The MILP solver therefore certifies optimality within the reduced commitment space, although global optimality over F is not guaranteed in general. However, as we will show in Sec. V, the optimality loss is minuscule, while the solving efficiency gain is significant. These results clarify that the proposed framework preserves the original UC constraints and exact optimization within the restricted subspace. Any deviation in objective value arises solely from feasible-region reduction through selective commitment restriction, rather than from approximation of the underlying optimization model. V. E XPERIMENTAL VALIDATION 

We evaluates the proposed commitment-restriction frame-work for accelerating network-constrained unit commitment (UC). The method fixes a carefully selected subset of unit–hour commitment variables prior to solving, thereby reducing the effective branch-and-bound search space. The underlying UC formulation, including all network constraints, ramping limits, and minimum up/down requirements, remains unchanged. The MILP solver therefore continues to enforce full operational feasibility and determines the optimal dispatch together with the remaining unfixed commitment decisions. We compare the proposed strategy with representative data-driven acceleration approaches that derive commitment pat-terns from historical UC instances. Such methods typically reduce computational effort by transferring commitment struc-tures from similar load conditions, but they may not explic-itly guarantee feasibility during prediction. We also compare against approaches that preserve the original UC formulation while providing structured guidance to the solver, so that feasibility and optimality certification remain entirely within the MILP framework. The numerical studies are organized to address several practical questions that arise in UC acceleration. First, we verify that computational improvements do not result from arbitrarily fixing commitment variables, but from selecting decisions that are consistent with system operating conditions. This is demonstrated by comparing the proposed restriction strategy with a random commitment-fixing benchmark under the same fixing ratio. Second, we evaluate performance in a setting where no historical commitment schedules are available to guide the restriction process. This experiment examines whether the method avoids economically or operationally detrimental fix-ing decisions when only generator characteristics and the daily load profile are provided. Third, we examine performance under varying demand conditions. In practice, commitment patterns derived from historical data may become less representative when overall demand levels or ramping requirements change. We therefore test whether the proposed method maintains computational effectiveness and acceptable cost performance when applied to load profiles that differ from those seen in prior instances. Finally, we evaluate robustness under load uncertainty and over extended operating horizons. Specifically, we examine whether the computational benefits persist when load forecasts are perturbed and when the UC problem is solved repeat-edly over long sequences of daily operations. Such settings introduce stronger inter-temporal interactions and increased overall computational burden, reflecting practical studies such as rolling-horizon scheduling and scenario-based planning. 

A. Experimental Setup 

The proposed approach is evaluated on UC systems across multiple scale levels, including the IEEE 57-bus system, the IEEE 73-bus RTS test system [21], and the IEEE 118-bus system. For the IEEE 57-bus and IEEE 118-bus cases, the network topology (bus/branch data and electrical limits) is obtained from PGLib-OPF/MATPOWER representations [22]. The corresponding unit commitment parameters (e.g., minimum up/down times, ramp limits, start-up/shut-down costs, and multi-segment production costs) are taken from the MATPOWER-format UC instances provided by [23], [24]. These sources are combined to construct network-constrained UC MILPs. To study how UC difficulty escalates with increased com-mitment complexity, we construct two augmented variants on the IEEE 118-bus network by adding additional generating units, resulting in two enlarged MILP cases denoted as 118-bus+20 and 118-bus+30. These augmented systems increase the number of binary commitment variables and inter-temporal coupling constraints. All test cases are implemented in AMPL using the identical UC formulation and solved with Gurobi under consistent parameter settings. Solver tolerances and nu-merical configurations are kept unchanged across all systems and all solution strategies to ensure fair comparisons. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS 7

For robustness evaluation, the IEEE 73-bus RTS system is further subjected to load perturbations. The baseline hourly demand profile is perturbed using Gaussian noise with relative magnitudes between 5% and 30% , applied independently to each hour to generate new daily instances. Each perturbed case uses the same generator data and network configuration as the baseline. For the long-horizon study, daily demand profiles are derived from real historical data provided by the PGLIB benchmark. Noise is applied where necessary to construct a complete 365-day sequence of UC instances. The solving times are recorded in all comparisons corresponding to the internal solver time returned by Gurobi. Four solution strategies are evaluated on each system using the identical UC formulation:  

> •

Original MILP: The full UC formulation solved directly by Gurobi without any restriction. This serves as the reference for objective values and computational effort.  

> •

K-means Masking: Historical days are clustered using K-means based on load profiles. Representative commit-ment patterns derived from cluster centroids are used to fix selected unit-hour variables.  

> •

KNN Masking: Nearest-neighbor retrieval is performed using load similarity. Commitment patterns from the most similar historical days are transferred to define restriction sets.  

> •

LLM-Assisted Commitment Restriction (GPT-4o): Alarge language model generates a sparse subset of unit-hour commitment decisions to be fixed prior to solving. The UC formulation itself remains unchanged, and fea-sibility and optimality certification are fully enforced by the MILP solver. The data-driven masking approaches rely on historical UC instances to extract representative commitment structures. In contrast, the LLM-Assisted strategy uses generator character-istics and load information to identify commitment variables that are likely to remain stable over the scheduling horizon. In all cases, once commitment variables are fixed, the remaining UC problem is solved using the same MILP solver and formulation. 

B. Comparison with Random Commitment Restriction 

This subsection verifies that restricting an appropriate subset of commitment variables can significantly reduce the compu-tational burden of unit commitment, whereas restricting an inappropriate subset can increase both the objective value and the computational burden. To make this distinction explicit, we contrast a random freezing strategy with the proposed LLM-Assisted masking approach on a representative 24-hour instance of the IEEE 73-bus RTS system, using the same freeze ratio 10% for both methods. Table I reports the resulting sim-plex iterations, branch-and-bound nodes, and solving times, together with the baseline MILP solve without any freezing. Under the random commitment-fixing strategy, the solver requires substantially more computational effort than the base-line MILP. This is reflected in higher simplex iterations, a larger number of branch-and-bound nodes, and increased wall-clock time. In addition, random fixing degrades solution TABLE I: Comparison among plain MILP, random freezing, and LLM-Assisted.                           

> Method Simplex iters Branch nodes Time (s) MILP (no freezing) 3.61 ×10 63.28 ×10 51149 .33
> Random freezing ( ≈10% )1.49 ×10 71.19 ×10 63004 .75
> LLM-Assisted ( ≈10% )7.07 ×10 56.26 ×10 4177 .60

quality. The total dispatch cost increases by approximately 6.1% relative to the baseline MILP solution. This cost increase indicates that indiscriminate commitment fixing can restrict the feasible region in a way that interferes with the solver’s branch-and-bound search, even when the fixing ratio is small. In contrast, the proposed LLM-Assisted commitment re-striction maintains solution quality while reducing compu-tational effort. The objective deviation remains below 0.3% 

relative to the baseline MILP solution. At the same time, simplex iterations and branch-and-bound nodes are reduced, leading to shorter solve times. These results indicate that computational improvement depends on selecting structurally appropriate commitment variables for restriction, rather than on fixing variables arbitrarily. 

C. Performance Without Historical Commitment Information 

The preceding results indicate that effective UC acceleration depends on restricting commitment variables in a manner consistent with system operating conditions. We next evaluate the proposed method in a setting where no historical commit-ment schedules are provided to guide the restriction process. In this experiment, the commitment-restriction strategy is generated using only generator characteristics and the test-day 24-hour load profile, which is perturbed from real system data by 10% . No prior commitment solutions or historical UC instances are used. Performance is compared against the baseline UC MILP solved directly by Gurobi. Data-driven masking methods such as KNN and K-means are not included in this experiment because they require historical commitment schedules to construct restriction patterns. TABLE II: Performance comparison of the baseline MILP and the LLM-Assisted commitment restriction without historical commitment information. Average objective value and solve time are reported over test instances.                                                  

> System Method Avg Cost Avg Time(s) 57-bus MILP 1.12 ×10 65.85
> LLM 1.12 ×10 64.74
> RTS MILP 3.30 ×10 61149 .33
> LLM 3.37 ×10 6189 .12
> 118-bus MILP 1.67 ×10 79.06
> LLM 1.70 ×10 76.35
> 118-bus+20 MILP 1.34 ×10 745 .99
> LLM 1.35 ×10 722 .26
> 118-bus+30 MILP 1.33 ×10 7823 .25
> LLM 1.35 ×10 7155 .34 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS 8

Table II summarizes the performance of the proposed commitment-restriction strategy when no historical commit-ment schedules are available. The method reduces solve time across all tested systems, with the largest gains observed on the more computationally challenging instances. For the 57-bus system, solve time decreases from 5.85 s to 

4.74 s , corresponding to a 1.23 × speedup with a 0.27% objec-tive increase. On the RTS system, the baseline MILP requires 

1149 .33 s on average, while the proposed method reduces this to 189 .12 s , yielding a 6.08 × speedup with a 2.18% objective increase. For the 118-bus family, speedups of 1.43 ×, 2.07 ×,and 5.30 × are observed on 118-bus, 118-bus+20, and 118-bus+30, respectively. As additional generators are introduced, the MILP solve time increases from 9.06 s to 45 .99 s and further to 823 .25 s , whereas the corresponding solve times under the proposed restriction grow more moderately to 6.35 s ,

22 .26 s , and 155 .34 s .In terms of solution quality, the restricted solutions remain close to the MILP baseline, with objective deviations ranging from 0.27% to 2.18% . The larger deviation observed on the RTS system suggests that, in the absence of historical com-mitment information, restricting certain commitment variables may exclude economically preferable schedules, particularly in systems with strong inter-temporal coupling and complex commitment structure. Overall, these results indicate that meaningful computational acceleration can be achieved with-out historical commitment data, although objective deviations may increase on more challenging systems. 

D. Comparison Across System Levels and Generator Augmen-tation 

In addition to the comparison with random commitment fixing and the case without historical commitment information, we examine how the proposed acceleration strategy scales with system size. Specifically, performance is evaluated across multiple system levels (57-bus, RTS, and 118-bus). To further increase problem difficulty, we augment the 118-bus system by adding additional generating units, resulting in two expanded cases denoted as 118-bus+20 and 118-bus+30. These aug-mented systems increase the number of binary commitment variables and strengthen inter-temporal coupling constraints. Such increases are known to significantly enlarge the branch-and-bound search space and computational burden of solving the UC MILP. For each system, we compare the full MILP formulation with three acceleration strategies: the proposed LLM-Assisted commitment restriction, KNN-based masking, and K-means-based masking. Test instances are constructed from real sys-tem data with a 10% load perturbation to assess robustness. Table III reports the average objective value and the average solve time for each method. The increase in MILP solve time under generator aug-mentation is reflected in the underlying branch-and-bound and LP solution effort. Along the 118-bus augmentation se-quence, both the number of explored branch-and-bound nodes and simplex iterations increase by approximately two orders of magnitude. Correspondingly, the baseline wall-clock time TABLE III: Average objective value and solve time of the compared UC solution strategies across different system sizes.                                                                                    

> System Method Avg Cost Avg Time(s) 57-bus MILP 1.12 ×10 65.85
> LLM 1.12 ×10 63.44
> KNN 1.12 ×10 63.91
> K-means 1.12 ×10 63.84
> RTS MILP 3.30 ×10 61149 .33
> LLM 3.30 ×10 6171 .59
> KNN 3.31 ×10 6558 .34
> K-means 3.31 ×10 6714 .54
> 118-bus MILP 1.68 ×10 79.06
> LLM 1.69 ×10 74.97
> KNN 1.69 ×10 75.72
> K-means 1.69 ×10 76.92
> 118-bus+20 MILP 1.34 ×10 745 .99
> LLM 1.34 ×10 723 .49
> KNN 1.34 ×10 730 .69
> K-means 1.34 ×10 744 .17
> 118-bus+30 MILP 1.333 ×10 7823 .25
> LLM 1.335 ×10 7112 .49
> KNN 1.336 ×10 7130 .67
> K-means 1.335 ×10 7131 .48

grows from O(10) s to O(10 3) s . In contrast, the proposed LLM-Assisted commitment restriction exhibits more moderate growth in solve time as system size increases, resulting in larger relative speedups on the augmented cases. Table III further illustrates the scaling behavior across sys-tem levels. On the 57-bus system, the LLM-Assisted method reduces average solve time from 5.85 s to 3.44 s , correspond-ing to a 1.70 × speedup. KNN and K-means reduce solve time to 3.91 s and 3.84 s , respectively. Objective deviations remain small, at 0.27% for the LLM-Assisted method and below 0.36% for KNN and K-means. On the RTS system, the baseline MILP requires 1149 .33 s 

on average, whereas the LLM-Assisted method reduces this to 171 .59 s , yielding a 6.70 × speedup. KNN and K-means require 558 .34 s and 714 .54 s , respectively, with all methods remaining within a 0.34% objective deviation. A similar pattern is observed for the 118-bus family. The LLM-Assisted method reduces solve time from 9.06 s to 4.97 s on 118-bus and from 45 .99 s to 23 .49 s on 118-bus+20. On 118-bus+30, solve time decreases from 823 .25 s to 112 .49 s , with an objective deviation of approximately 0.15% relative to the MILP baseline. 

E. Comparison under Load Uncertainty and Long-Horizon Operations 

The uncertainty experiments are conducted on the IEEE 73-bus RTS system using a representative daily load profile that includes a significant evening peak, requiring substantial inter-temporal coordination in ramping and commitment decisions. To evaluate robustness under load forecast uncertainty, Gaus-sian perturbations are applied to the baseline hourly demand IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS 9

profile. Four noise levels are considered, corresponding to rela-tive standard deviations of 10% , 20% , 30% , and 40% . For each noise level, the UC problem is solved using four approaches: the full MILP formulation, K-means-based masking, KNN-based masking, and the proposed LLM-Assisted commitment restriction. Table IV summarizes the performance of the compared methods under the 10% load perturbation scenario. All ap-proaches produce feasible commitment schedules that sat-isfy power balance, minimum up/down time constraints, and ramping limits. Objective deviations remain small across all strategies, indicating that restricting the commitment space does not materially degrade solution quality at this noise level. From a computational perspective, the LLM-Assisted com-mitment restriction provides the largest reduction in solve time. At the 10% noise level, solve time decreases by 85 .11% ,and the number of explored branch-and-bound nodes decreases by 66 .41% relative to the full MILP formulation. The K-means and KNN strategies also reduce computational effort, though to a lesser extent. The reported constraint and variable reduc-tion percentages confirm that all masking approaches reduce the effective size of the optimization problem, with the LLM-Assisted method achieving the greatest overall reductions in this setting. TABLE IV: Comparison of different acceleration methods on the IEEE 73 bus system.                               

> Parameters MILP K-means KNN LLM Cost relative error (%) 0.00 0.36 <0.30 <0.30
> Solve time (s) 1149 .33 714 .54 558 .34 171 .58
> Time reduction (%) 0.00 37 .83 51 .42 85 .11
> Constraint reduction (%) 0.00 33 .08 24 .46 36 .73
> Variable reduction (%) 0.00 6.412 .40 22 .52
> Node reduction (%) 0.00 22 .50 37 .23 66 .41

Table V reports the average and maximum solve times across the four load perturbation levels. The LLM-Assisted commitment restriction reduces solve time at all noise lev-els. At 10% noise, the average solve time decreases from 

1149 .328 s to 171 .585 s. At 20% noise, the average solve time decreases from 803 .719 s to 19 .336 s, and at 30% noise from 

1517 .875 s to 80 .205 s. The maximum solve times exhibit similar reductions, decreasing by 91 .48% , 96 .82% , 93 .54% ,and 92 .66% across the four noise levels. These results indi-cate that the proposed restriction strategy maintains reduced computational effort even when load perturbations increase ramping activity and commitment adjustments. Table VI evaluates the corresponding impact on objective value. Objective deviations remain small across all noise levels. The relative error is below 0.03% at 10% noise and stays within 2.99% , 3.80% , and 3.37% for the 20% , 30% , and 

40% noise scenarios. Taken together, the results in Tables V and VI indicate that the computational reductions are achieved with limited impact on optimality under load uncertainty. As shown in Fig. 2, black indicates the off state and white indicates the on state. Both panels illustrate the 24-hour commitment schedule, with each row corresponding to one generating unit. The LLM-Assisted schedule closely matches TABLE V: Time-related results of MILP and LLM-Assisted under different load noise levels on the IEEE 73-bus system.                             

> Parameters 10% 20% 30% 40%
> Ave. Time Original MILP (s) 1149 .33 803 .72 1517 .87 1012 .36
> LLM-Assisted (s) 171 .59 19 .34 80 .21 62 .85
> Reduced Rate (%) 85 .11 97 .59 94 .71 93 .79
> Max. Time Original MILP (s) 2678 .98 853 .44 2148 .87 1337 .36
> LLM-Assisted (s) 228 .27 27 .17 138 .78 98 .06
> Reduced Rate (%) 91 .48 96 .82 93 .54 92 .66

TABLE VI: Cost-related results of MILP and LLM-Assisted under different load noise levels on the IEEE 73 bus system.                  

> Parameters 10% 20% 30% 40%
> Original MILP (10 5$) 33 .01 32 .47 34 .17 34 .72
> LLM-Assisted (10 5$) 33 .01 33 .44 35 .47 35 .89
> Relative Error (%) <0.30 2.99 3.80 3.37

the MILP baseline. Base-load units remain committed through-out the day, while mid-merit and peaking units adjust their commitment during peak demand periods. Minor differences appear in a small number of marginal units with greater operational flexibility. The two schedule matches in 98 .23% 

of the commitment variables. This high level of agreement indicates that the proposed restriction strategy preserves the principal structural features of the UC solution while reducing computational effort. Long-horizon operation requires that any acceleration strat-egy remain effective across sequences of daily UC problems with varying load patterns and commitment cycles. To evaluate this behavior, we apply the proposed restriction method to 

365 consecutive daily UC instances. The baseline MILP solver exhibits substantial day-to-day variability in solve time. Many instances exceed 1500 s and several exceed 2500 s, indicating sensitivity of the branch-and-bound process to changing load and system conditions. In comparison, the LLM-Assisted re-striction method maintains solve times below 300 s for all 365 

instances. As shown in Fig. 3, the year-long results indicate that the proposed method reduces computational variability while preserving feasibility and maintaining objective values close to the MILP baseline. VI. C ONCLUSION 

This paper presented a commitment-restriction framework for accelerating network-constrained unit commitment prob-lems. By fixing a carefully selected subset of unit-hour com-mitment variables prior to solving, the proposed approach reduces the effective discrete search space without modify-ing the constraints. The MILP solver therefore retains full responsibility for feasibility enforcement and optimal dispatch of unfixed variables. Numerical studies across multiple bench-mark systems demonstrated that computational gains depend on selecting structurally consistent commitment decisions. Compared with existing approaches, the proposed strategy reduces branch-and-bound effort while maintaining objective values close to the MILP baseline. The largest speedups occur in larger and more combinatorial systems, and robustness tests IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS 10 

MILP LLM-Assisted 

Fig. 2: Comparison of 24-hour unit commitment schedules from the MILP baseline and the LLM-Assisted method. Rows correspond to generating units and columns to hours; white and black denote on and off states, respectively. 

Fig. 3: Solve-time comparison over 365 consecutive daily unit commitment instances. Each point corresponds to one 24-hour UC problem solved by the MILP baseline and the LLM-Assisted restriction method. under load perturbations and year-long simulations indicate stable performance over extended operating conditions. REFERENCES [1] N. P. Padhy, “Unit commitment-a bibliographical survey,” IEEE Trans-actions on power systems , vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1196–1205, 2004. [2] B. Knueven, J. Ostrowski, and J.-P. Watson, “On mixed-integer pro-gramming formulations for the unit commitment problem,” INFORMS Journal on Computing , vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 857–876, 2020. [3] K. W. Hedman, M. C. Ferris, R. P. O’Neill, E. B. Fisher, and S. S. Oren, “Co-optimization of generation unit commitment and transmission switching with n-1 reliability,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems ,vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 1052–1063, 2010. [4] G. Morales-Espa˜ na, J. M. Latorre, and A. Ramos, “Tight and compact milp formulation for the thermal unit commitment problem,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 4897–4908, 2013. [5] Z. Wang, J. Gao, Q. Cui, and Y. Weng, “Constrained branching search for topology identification stream computing with lightweight imple-mentation,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 3474–3486, 2025. [6] H. Pandˇ zi´ c, T. Qiu, and D. S. Kirschen, “Comparison of state-of-the-art transmission constrained unit commitment formulations,” in IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting , 2013, pp. 1–5. [7] K. Oikonomou, B. Vyakaranam, T. B. Nguyen, K. Harris, E. Schweitzer, N. Samaan, C. Qin, F. Bereta dos Reis, M. M. Abdelmalak, M. Kint-ner Meyer, and J. Dagle, “Western interconnection baseline study,” Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Tech. Rep. PNNL-36452, Sep. 2024. [8] J. Rand, N. Manderlink, W. Gorman, R. H. Wiser, J. Seel, J. M. Kemp, S. Jeong, and F. Kahrl, “Queued up 2024 edition characteristics of power plants seeking transmission interconnection as of the end of 2023,” Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Tech. Rep., Apr. 2024. [9] Y. Chen, F. Pan, F. Qiu, A. S. Xavier, T. Zheng, M. Marwali, B. Knueven, Y. Guan, P. B. Luh, L. Wu, B. Yan, M. A. Bragin, H. Zhong, A. Giacomoni, R. Baldick, B. Gisin, Q. Gu, R. Philbrick, and F. Li, “Security-constrained unit commitment for electricity market: Modeling, solution methods, and future challenges,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 4668–4681, 2023. [10] S. Pineda and J. Morales, “Is learning for the unit commitment problem a low-hanging fruit?” Electric Power Systems Research , vol. 207, p. 107851, 2022. [11] C. Zhang, Z. Qin, and Y. Sun, “Learning-based branching acceleration for unit commitment with few training samples,” Applied Sciences ,vol. 15, no. 6, 2025. [12] G. Zhuozan, “Combining deep learning and branch-and-cut algorithm for transmission-constrained unit commitment,” in Asia Conference on Power and Electrical Engineering , 2024, pp. 1465–1469. [13] C. Lawless, Y. Li, A. Wikum, M. Udell, and E. Vitercik, “LLMs for cold-start cutting plane separator configuration,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12038 [14] J. Yuan, J. Wu, Y. Weng, and E. Blasch, “SVR-enhanced optimization for voltage control in observability-limited distribution systems,” in IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting , 2025, pp. 1–5. [15] J. Wu, J. Yuan, Y. Weng, and G. Wang, “A unified approach to enforce non-negativity constraint in neural network approximation for optimal voltage regulation,” in Proceedings of the Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , 2025. [16] T. Ahmed and S. Choudhury, “Lm4opt: Unveiling the potential of large language models in formulating mathematical optimization problems,” 

Information Systems and Operational Research , vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 559– 572, 2024. [17] X. Cai, Z. Meng, Q. Guo, L. Jiang, J. Wu, M. Min, Y. Cheng, X. Gui, and J. Zhao, “Mingyue: A multi-agent system for human-ai collaborative decision-making under safety constraints in complex power grids,” in 

Power System and Green Energy Conference , 2025, pp. 434–439. [18] Q. Zhang and L. Xie, “Poweragent: A road map toward agentic intel-ligence in power systems: Foundation model, model context protocol, and workflow,” IEEE Power and Energy Magazine , vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 93–101, 2025. [19] M. Guo and Y. Weng, “Solar photovoltaic assessment with large lan-guage model,” Applied Energy , vol. 402, p. 126835, 2025. [20] R. Yu, L. Mai, Y. Weng, Q. Cui, G. Xu, and P. Ren, “Vision–language models for transmission line fault detection: A new approach for grid reliability and optimization,” Journal of Imaging , vol. 12, no. 3, 2026. [21] C. Barrows, A. Bloom, A. Ehlen, J. Ik¨ aheimo, J. Jorgenson, D. Krish-namurthy, J. Lau, B. McBennett, M. O’Connell, E. Preston, A. Staid, G. Stephen, and J.-P. Watson, “The IEEE reliability test system: A proposed 2019 update,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 119–127, 2020. [22] IEEE PES Task Force on Benchmarks for Validation of Emerging Power System Algorithms, “Power Grid Lib - Unit Commitment (PGLib-UC), Version 19.08,” https://github.com/power-grid-lib/pglib-uc/tree/v19.08, 2019, accessed: 2026-03-20. [23] A. S. Xavier, A. M. Kazachkov, O. Yurdakul, J. He, and F. Qiu, “Unitcommitment.jl: A julia/jump optimization package for security-constrained unit commitment (version 0.3),” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://axavier.org/UnitCommitment.jl/0.3/ [24] R. D. Zimmerman, C. E. Murillo-Sanchez, and R. J. Thomas, “Mat-power: Steady-state operations, planning and analysis tools for power systems research and education,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems ,vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 12–19, 2011.